Pregnant Kourtney Kardashian and Scott Disick Hold Hands—See the Pic!

Kourtney Kardashian and Scott Disick, watch out: It looks like pretty darn soon you two are going to be outnumbered!
The Keeping Up With the Kardashians stars, who are expecting baby No. 3 together, were spotted holding hands in Beverly Hills Friday. Kourt covered up her burgeoning baby bump in a black dress and coordinating leather blazer, while Lord Disick looked casual and chic in what appeared to be at least three shades of grey.
Don't let these dulled-down, everyday looks fool you, though, dolls. Scott's love of bling, watches and all things luxe is pretty much unsurpassed, and Kourtney's certainly not a buttoned-up kind of gal. In fact, she just recently posed in the nude for DuJour magazine!
PHOTOS: More of Kourtney's nude DuJour pics!
"I really feel so comfortable, and almost at my best, when I'm pregnant," said Kourt, proud mama of Mason, 4, and Penelope, 2. "I don't know, I just feel just like it's such an amazing feeling, the transformation that your body goes through and knowing that this is what my body is made to do, there's something about that that's so empowering and beautiful and I just really embrace it."
"I'm not trying to impress anybody, or be something that I'm not. It's just a beautiful thing, just being able to take those photographs and have them, and just be able to show my children, 'This was you inside,'" she went on. "It's just been about the shape of my body being pregnant and capturing that moment in my life that's appealing to me."
PHOTO: See how gorgeous Kourtney looked at her baby shower!
So will Kourt ever pull a Kim Kardashian and do a naked cover when she isn't expecting? She told DuJour she "would never sway never to doing a nude shoot not pregnant."
No matter what this hot mama decides though, she knows Scott will always be on her side. "One thing that's amazing about him is that he's always very supportive and very complimentary," she said. "Whether I'm changing, or about to take a shower, or something, he's always complimenting my body and makes me feel good about myself."
Make sure to tune into Kourtney & Khloé Take the Hamptons Sunday night at 9 p.m. only on E!