East Alabama Community Ballet presents 'The Nutcracker' this week

Katherine Haas | Opelika-Auburn News
The East Alabama Community Ballet (EACB) invites spectators to drift away into a world defined by everything sugary, sweet and surreal this holiday season.
This Friday through Sunday, the ballet will perform the holiday classic, "The Nutcracker", a well-known story about a little girl whose toys come to life one magical Christmas.
“The Nutcracker is a traditional Christmas ballet and is performed by many ballet companies around the world each year,” said Carol Smith, artistic director for the EACB. “This will be our 18th full-length production, following two years of excerpts from the ballet starting in 1995.”
The ballet opens with Clara and her brother Fritz at a party hosted by their parents. Suddenly, a strange guest arrives in the middle of the festivities, who turns out to be the children’s mysterious godfather, Herr Drosselmeyer. Drosselmeyer gives Clara a nutcracker, and she falls asleep next to her new gift after the party.
Clara then dreams that her godfather casts a spell over the nutcracker and her other toys, bringing them to life.
“He makes the Christmas tree grow to an enormous height and toy soldiers, led by the Nutcracker, spring to life to battle mice and their leader, the Mouse King,” Smith said. “In the fight that follows, the Nutcracker is victorious, and Herr Drosselmeyer transforms the Nutcracker into a handsome prince who then leads Clara to the Land of Snow.”
Continuing her dream journey, the Nutcracker leads Clara to the Land of Sweets, where she watches performances by dancers from different countries. A Spanish dance represents chocolate, an Arabian dance represents coffee, a Chinese dance represents tea, a Russian dance represents candy canes and a Swiss dance represents marzipan.
Mother Ginger, Dew Drop and Sugar Plum fairies also make appearances before Clara returns to reality.
“Clara is left with the memory of a most beautiful Christmas and her Nutcracker,” Smith said.
Cast members for the ballet come from local dance studios and range from age 6 through college age.
“As well as all dancers being from local dance studios, for the past several years we have also invited local dance teachers to choreograph pieces for The Nutcracker making this truly a unique, collaborative production,” Smith said. “Each year we bring in professional dancers to perform with our dancers. This year Courtney Dressner from Georgia Ballet will be performing the Sugar Plum variation.”
Smith, along with fellow artistic director Angie White, has served on the artistic staff of the EACB since its inception in 1995. It was first called Auburn Community Ballet and then LynnTerra before becoming EACB in 2010.
“EACB continues to grow as the area's only community ballet company, fostering a love of dance through outreach and community activities,” Smith said.
Smith explained that the company has offered school children in East Alabama the opportunity to attend a performance of the Nutcracker for the past few years.
“This year we are able to offer four school performances funded by local businesses, donations and the hard work of parents and dancers,” Smith said. “Prior to the school children attending these performances, volunteers go to the schools to read the story of The Nutcracker and to distribute Nutcracker books with the vision of educating children in the arts.”
Performance dates and times for The Nutcracker are Friday at 7 p.m., Saturday at 2 p.m., and Sunday at 2 p.m. Ticket prices are $16.50 for adults and $11.50 for students and seniors.
All performances will be held at Telfair Peet Theater on Auburn University’s campus. Tickets can be purchased online at eacballet.com.
“We would encourage everyone to attend a performance of The Nutcracker,” Smith said. “It is a beautiful story performed by local area dancers who pour heart and soul into each performance. We would hope that everyone would leave feeling as if they also had been touched by a little 'magic.’”