Sarah Michelle Gellar Says Freddie Prinze Jr. Is ''Recovering'' After Spine Surgery, Talks Holiday Plans

Rest assured, folks: Freddie Prinze Jr. is on the mend. 
The 38-year-old actor, who underwent spine surgery just one week ago, was unable to attend the 4th Annual Santa's Secret Workshop event in West Hollywood on Saturday night, which benefitted L.A. Family Housing, but wife Sarah Michelle Gellar was there to represent on behalf of the star couple, toting along the pair's two children, Charlotte, 5, and Rocky, 2. 
"Oh my god, you mean Freddie that's like learning how to walk again?!..." she quipped, poking fun at her hubby's recent tweet when asked how Freddie is feeling, adding, "My poor husband couldn't make it."

"By the way, he was coming, he was in tears," she said, turning to pal Bill Horn (who organized the star-studded event), expressing her hubby's sympathies. "He was like 'I promised Bill and Scout they're so good to me, I have to be there.' But he's just so tired. I mean he did have spine surgery…" she said before adding with a smile, "But he's not learning now to walk."
So, how is Freddie, who has been sharing numerous health updates on social media, feeling these days? 
"He's recovering..." she said, reassuring fans that her hubby will soon be in tip top shape for the holidays. "He'll be cooking. I handle Thanksgiving, Christmas will be all him."  
Gellar's two children were having a blast at the event, which featured plenty of gift tables filled with kid-friendly goodies, including Jenny Cookies and a room filled with "snow" where children could take photos with Santa. Hot chocolates and holiday drinks were also served by Keurig while kids test drove the latest in gaming in the Kurio Extreme gaming lounge. 

"It's also about introducing the act of giving back," the mother of two said of the holiday season. "So the holidays are not just about getting, it's about giving. And they're at the age now, Rocky not as much, but Charlotte where she understands…and so to me that's the other big tradition of the holiday."
The happy couple, who wed in 2002, also plans to spend New Years as a family.
"We do have New Years plans!" the erstwhile Buffy star said with excitement. "It's our first year that we're actually going to be celebrating New Years and we're going out with the kids. And we're doing a 9 o'clock New Years and our children have never stayed up until 9 o'clock. Charlotte has never seen 9 o'clock," she said, before turning to her pal and joking, "10 bucks I send you a picture of Charlotte passed out in a chair."