Jennifer Aniston Says Sex Scene in Horrible Bosses 2 Was Edited Out—Find Out Why

While there were plenty of risqué moments in the new comedy Horrible Bosses 2, there was one sex scene that ended up on the cutting room floor, according to Jennifer Aniston.
The actress, who reprises her 2011 role as sex-addicted dentist Julia Harris in the recently-released film, talked about the omitted footage in an interview on Conan that aired earlier this week.
"You had a sex scene in Horrible Bosses 2 that was edited out and I thought, 'That's not possible. No one edits out a Jennifer Aniston sex scene,'" host Conan O'Brien said.
"No, it was possible. Because it was..kind of not even mutual, you know..." she said, starting to mumble.
"Charlie Day's character....is in a coma," she continued. "And I exploit him whilst he is in a coma. So it was a sex scene that was sort of....yeah, they removed it."
VIDEO: Jennifer Aniston squeezes Jason Sudeikis' butt at Horrible Bosses 2 premiere
In the first Horrible Bosses movie, Aniston's character continuously harassed Day's character, Dale, her dental assistant, and sexually assaulted him while he was unconscious during a procedure. She shows him pictures of the explicit acts, threatening to blackmail him.

WATCH: Jennifer Aniston invites Jason Bateman to poop on her on in Horrible Bosses 2 trailer
Aniston had also talked about the scene in question in an interview with Collider several weeks ago.
"Charlie and I also had a wonderful surveillance camera moment that ended up not being in the movie," she said. "I had to do it on top of him in a coma, and he broke, half-way through the take, when I grabbed him."
Aniston told O'Brien said she thinks the deleted Horrible Bosses 2 footage may be included as an extra scene on the movie's DVD.
"Terrifying thing to have to shoot, by the way," she added. "Because usually, you have a partner with you, like, to sort of be like, 'God, this is hard, huh?' 'Yeah, this is hard'...you usually have someone there to support but he's just laying there in a coma."