Crow Nation Questions EPA Regulations

According to a source at the Los Angeles Times, Darrin Old Coyote, Chairman of the Crow Nation in Montana teamed up with 17 state attorney generals this past Friday to challenge the Obama administration’s attempt effort to reduce carbon emissions from power plants by 30 percent. Old Coyote claimed it would “cripple” the Crow economy.
crow nation
He stated the new EPA (US Environmental Protection Agency) regulations would significantly reduce the Crow Nation’s coal exports to power plants. The Crow noted that the tribe’s revenue from coal mining accounts for two-thirds of its nonfederal funding and they already have an unemployment rate of 47 percent.
The Crow nation reservation includes 2 million acres of subsurface mineral rights. This reportedly includes approximately 9 billion tons of coal.
Old Coyote stated: “Without any regard to humans’ lives, they are saying we have to shut down carbon emissions by this much. The EPA is overstepping their bounds. They are taking it to another level where it will be devastating to us.”
Montana Attorney General Tim Fox and Old Coyote sent a communiqué to the EPA’s administrator, Gina McCarthy, saying that the agency “utterly failed” to take into account how the administration’s plans to lower carbon emissions 30 percent from 2005 levels by 2030 would affect the Crow economy. It also stated that the agency did not even consult with the Crow leadership let alone offer alternatives to offset the effects of the proposed plan.
crow nation
The EPA, however, released a statement in which they say they met with the Crow last July following the release of the proposal. They also twice mailed notifications regarding the proposal.
In response, Old Coyote then acknowledged the letters saying that they were both “boilerplate announcements.” He also stated that the meeting mentioned in the press release didn’t solicit the tribe’s feedback.
Old Coyote told the press: “They said, ‘Oh, hi, hello, we are the EPA and this is our regulation.’  There was no conversation.”
Details of this meeting are essential as Fox said the Crow Nation could attempt to overturn the rule if the tribal leaders can actually prove the agency failed to “properly consult with them.”
Old Coyote concluded: “The lawmakers should be the ones working it out, not the agency saying: ‘This is what we are going to do whether you like it or not’.”

