Fastest 2D Camera Ever Created A Huge Discovery in Engineering

Researchers have created a new camera which is the fastest 2D camera ever made. This device can capture events at a mind blowing 100 billion frames per second, which is magnitudes faster than any other current receive-only ultrafast imaging techniques. For this creation, engineers employed a different technique than used in other receive-only ultrafast techniques, this is called compressed ultrafast technology (CUP). Other techniques that are currently being used are limited by on-chip storage and electronic readout speed to operations of about 10 million frames per second. With CUP, the researchers were able to create movies of the images they took with single laser shots of four physical phenomena: laser pulse reflection, refraction, photon racing in two media and faster-than light propagation of what is called non-information.

 
Lihong Wang, one of the researchers, said: “For the first time, humans can see light pulses on the fly. Because this technique advances the imaging frame rate by orders of magnitude, we now enter a new regime to open up new visions. Each new technique, especially one of a quantum leap forward, is always followed a number of new discoveries. it’s our hope that CUP will enable new discoveries in science-ones that we can’t even anticipate yet.”

 

This new 2D camera works with computational imaging, which is a series of devices, envisioned to work with high-powered microscopes and telescopes in order to capture dynamic natural and physical phenomena. After the raw data was acquired, the actual images are formed on a personal computer.

 

These particular findings could be huge in terms of understanding how certain processes take place, which in turn could pave the way for future discoveries. Richard Conroy, the program director of optical imaging at the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering, said:
“This is an exciting advance and the type of groundbreaking work that these high-rick NIH awards are designed to support. These ultrafast cameras have the potential to greatly enhance our understanding of very fast biological interactions and chemical processes and allow us to build better models of complex, dynamical systems.”