Bat signals jammed

“Hey, batter, batter, batter… swing!”

A little chatter in baseball can distract a player batting for the opposing team. Now, researchers report that some bats — the flying mammals, that is — also run interference when engaged in their own game of hit or miss.

Mexican free-tailed bats (Tadarida brasiliensis) can sabotage the calls made by others of their species. This hurts the chance those other bats will capture the moths they had been after, say Aaron Corcoran and William Conner. Both biologists work at Wake Forest University in Winston-Salem, N.C.

Jamming causes a competing bat to strike out more often while hunting insects, they reported November 7 in the journal Science. That can help even the score when as many as 1 million Mexican free-tailed bats from a single roost are flitting through the night sky, competing for food.

While hunting, bats send out special calls. Then they listen for an echo as that call bounces off moths or other flying insects. This is called echolocation. It’s roughly equivalent to the underwater sonar used by submarines. Dolphins, whales, shrews and even some birds also use echolocation to find prey.

Mexican free-tailed bats have a repertoire of at least 15 different calls. (The sounds bats make are too high-pitched for human ears. To hear the calls, scientists must use special equipment to lower the pitch.) One sound that the bats make is a call that gets faster and faster as the expert hunters close in on an insect meal. Scientists call this bat sound a “feeding buzz.”

The scientists captured this feeding buzz while recording various calls the bats made while hunting at locations in Arizona and New Mexico. The researchers noticed that bats made another particular sound only when a competing bat was buzzing in for the kill. The team suspected the bats were making this special sound to jam one another’s feeding buzz.

Follow-up observations, along with playing recorded jamming calls, revealed that well-timed jamming can foil a competitor's attempts to capture a moth up to 85.9 percent of the time.

Scientists had never before found evidence of an echolocating animal jamming its own kind. Nor is it clear if other bat species also jam one another’s calls. However, Corcoran and Conner previously showed how some moths can jam bat signals.