Thousands Of Documents From Albert Einstein Released Online

When Albert Einstein passed away in 1955, he left his copyright in the hands of the Hebrew University of Jerusalem and they have, since 1986, been engaged in a gigantic effort alongside the Princeton University Press to study the 80,000 documents he left behind.

 

Very soon, Digital Einstein will be introduced, and you will be able to share in the letters, papers, postcards, notebooks and diaries that the famous physicist left scattered in princeton and in other archives, attics and shoeboxes around the world with just the click of a button (and an Internet connection).

 

Today, The Einstein Papers project is currently edited by Diana Kormos-Buchwald, a professor of physics and the history of science at the California Institute of Technology, has published 13 volumes in print, out of a projected number of 30 total volumes.

 

About 5,000 documents have been published in the existing volumes so far, bringing Einstein’s story up to 1923, at the age of 44, in thick, hard-bound books that are dense with essays, footnotes and annotations detailing the personal, cultural and political life of those days.
Digitized versions of many of Einstein’s papers and letters have been available on the Einstein Archives of the Hebrew University and a separate set of white paperback volumes contain English translations of the thicker books.

 

Dr. Kormos-Buchwald says that visitors to the new Digital Einstein website will be able to switch between the English and German versions of the texts. You can take a look at Einstein’s love letters, high school transcript, divorce file, the notebook in which he worked out his general theory of relativity and letters to his lifelong best friend, Michele Besso, along with a lot of other possibilities.

 

Einstein, as you might learn from reading his thoughts, was a normal 20-year-old college student, who once wrote to his sister Maja: “If everybody lived a life like mine, there would be no need for novels.” And who would of guessed it, but he didn’t even begin to realize how many novels it would take to fill up as many books as they have detailing Einstein’s life.

 

In January, more than 1,000 documents will make up the 14th volume release, with the digital versions of all of the volumes being available at einsteinpapers.press.princeton.edu.