MSU to face Bryce Petty, potent Baylor in Cotton Bowl

East Lansing ? It might not have been exactly what Michigan State was expecting, but a spot in the Cotton Bowl on Jan. 1 and a shot to play a playoff-caliber team could end up being more of an opportunity than many had expected.

Entering Sunday's announcement of the four playoff teams and which teams would fill out the New Year's Six bowls, the common belief was Michigan State would head to the Orange Bowl and likely face Georgia Tech. However, the College Football Playoff selection committee pulled a fast one, jumping Mississippi State from No. 10 to No. 7.

That sent the Bulldogs to the Orange Bowl against Georgia Tech and meant No. 8 Michigan State was going to the Cotton Bowl to take on No. 5 Baylor, a team that shared the Big 12 championship with TCU and felt snubbed by not getting in the playoff.

For the Spartans (10-2), it provides a shot at a marquee opponent.

"I've learned not to worry about things you can't control," Michigan State coach Mark Dantonio said. "I think there's 128 teams in the country, and the fact that we're sitting there in the top 10 playing against another top-10 football team that was considered for the playoff ? highly, highly, considered and had a lot to do with that as everybody knows ? will give us more credibility as we move forward.

"I just felt like we were going to be in one of those four bowl games. I know that a lot of people had us pegged towards going to the Orange Bowl, because of all the scenarios involving the rankings and et cetera. But at the beginning of the day, quite honestly, I wanted to go to the Cotton Bowl. The opportunity to play in the Cotton Bowl would definitely put us against either TCU or Baylor, one of the two teams. Either way, whether they made it into the playoffs or not. And I felt like that would be a great game for us competitively."

Most of the Michigan State players admitted they had been thinking about the Orange Bowl and a matchup with Georgia Tech. But they found out early in Sunday's team banquet that things had changed.

For defensive end Shilique Calhoun, it gives he and his teammates a chance to prove once again ? even with a three-game bowl winning streak ? that they belong in the national conversation.

"Baylor, being a top-five team in the playoff poll, would better our status," the junior said, "if we come out with a win with how good they are and how respected they are nationally.

"We still need to win and that's our priority. (Our status) shows where we are in the polls. We lost to two teams that are in the top four and we're still No. 8. We still need to prove ourselves, there's always someone we need to prove ourselves to. We have to go out each and every game like it's a must-win game."

They'll have to prove that against a quality opponent. Baylor lost just once this season, 41-27 at West Virginia, and has victories over TCU and Kansas State.

The Bears, among others, believed they belonged in the playoff over Ohio State, especially after closing out the regular season on Saturday with a 38-27 victory over Kansas State. But Baylor coach Art Briles is sure his players won't look down at facing the Spartans in what will essentially be a home game.

"We're excited," Briles said. "Being from Texas and growing up here, I mean, the Cotton Bowl has always been the bowl down in this part of the nation. ¡¦ And I was fortunate enough to play for the Houston Cougars, back in '76. And we won (the Southwest Conference title) and played Maryland in the Cotton Bowl on January the 1st, 1977. So it's always held a close place to my heart."

And though Briles said earlier in the day he was upset about the committee's decision, he is expecting his team's best effort. In fact, when one reporter suggested the Bears wouldn't be focused to face a team like Michigan State that "might not have the name of some other opponents," Briles bristled.

"I think they have a huge name, unless you've been living under a rock," Briles said. "And I don't feel like either one of us has. So I mean, you don't win the Big Ten and win the Rose Bowl and not have great respect throughout this nation. So that's completely out of the question.

"We were excited about winning the Big 12 championship and that was our focus last night and it has been our focus all year. Guys are resilient. Youth is resilient.

"Our guys will be excited. They'll be pumped up, and they'll be ready to play just because I mean, that's what they do. We're football coaches, they're football players, and that's our trade. So that's not an issue."

The Bears aren't a whole lot different than the Spartans. Both feature high-powered offenses ? Baylor's 48.8 points and 581.3 yards a game lead the nation ? and each defense is stout, with the Bears leading the Big 12 in rushing yards allowed (107.7).

"I think the program parallels our program in so many ways in terms of the number of wins they have had this past year, the offensive production that they have had recently," Dantonio said. "And then also they're playing great defense as well. They give up 107 yards rushing a game, which is not very many in that conference.

"And they're second in sacks with (36), which parallels our sack production (37), and we lead the conference. So there's a lot of parallels in that."

