M.V.P. Ensures a Co-Star Departs on Top


CARSON, Calif. ? When Robbie Keane accepted Major League Soccer¡¯s Most Valuable Player award last week, he said he would gladly trade the trophy for another one ? the M.L.S. Cup.

As it turned out, no such deal was necessary.

On Sunday, Keane made sure he got both, delivering a goal in extra time that lifted the Los Angeles Galaxy to their fifth title, and third in four seasons, with a 2-1 victory over the New England Revolution before a raucous, sellout crowd on their home field.

Keane took a long pass from Marcelo Sarvas in the 111th minute and put the ball past goalkeeper Bobby Shuttleworth to cap what had been a wide open, if occasionally sloppy, championship. Keane, a 34-year-old star from Ireland, then did his signature cartwheel toward the corner flag.

The Galaxy then had to stave off an onslaught from New England, which threw its players forward in the final minutes. When the final whistle blew, several Galaxy players collapsed, looking more exhausted than celebrative.

Among them was Landon Donovan, the longtime Galaxy and United States national team star, who announced in August that he would retire after the season.

Donovan, the leading scorer in M.L.S. and for the United States in international play, also claimed his record sixth M.L.S. Cup, two of which he won with the San Jose Earthquakes.

¡°I¡¯m in a little bit of a fog,¡± said Donovan, who missed several scoring opportunities, including a free kick that sailed over the cross bar just before Keane¡¯s goal. ¡°It just feels a bit strange, is the best way to put it. As much excitement as there is about the game, there¡¯s also excitement that I don¡¯t have to train tomorrow. It feels good to go out this way.¡±

Galaxy Coach Bruce Arena, who coached Donovan on the national team during the 2002 and 2006 World Cups, said that even though Donovan had proved he could still play at an elite level in M.L.S., he was making the right decision.

¡°I¡¯m so happy he¡¯s been able to make this decision and he¡¯s able to go out as a winner,¡± Arena said. ¡°Can you write that any better, that script? He¡¯s spent. He¡¯s done.¡±

This script was sadly familiar for the Revolution, who have lost all of their five M.L.S. Cup appearances, four after extra time.

New England played with grit and discipline for most of the day, remaining in the game thanks in large part to the Galaxy¡¯s inability to finish myriad chances.

Continue reading the main story
RELATED COVERAGE

Jermaine Jones and the Revolution beat the Red Bulls last week and play for the title on Sunday.Jermaine Jones of the New England Revolution Is a Walking DichotomyDEC. 6, 2014
The Revolution sent the game into extra time by exposing the Galaxy¡¯s two center backs, Omar Gonzalez and Leonardo, whose distribution out of the back had been scattershot. In the 79th minute, the substitute Patrick Mullins beat Gonzalez to the end line and laid the ball back to Chris Tierney, who maneuvered around a lunging Leonardo and ripped a shot off goalkeeper Jaime Penedo and into the net.