Samir Nasri moans about his days with French national side

MANCHESTER, Dec 8 ? Retired international Samir Nasri described yesterday how playing for France had made him unhappy and blasted the treatment received by former teammate Franck Ribery.

Nasri, 27, confirmed his retirement from international football days before Ribery last August after being omitted from the France squad for the World Cup.

And the Manchester City midfielder admitted that it was not ¡°a question of age¡± but a ¡°feeling¡± which brought about the premature decision.

¡°I've already said it, the France team doesn't make me happy,¡± said Nasri, who made his France debut at the age of 19 in 2007 and won 41 caps, scoring five goals.

However, his international career was dogged by controversy.

He clashed with senior players during the 2008 European Championship and unleashed an expletive-strewn tirade at a journalist following France's elimination at Euro 2012, for which he received a three-game ban.

For his ¡°clash with a journalist¡± during Euro 2012, Nasri said he had been ¡°treated worse than someone who had participated in the (French team) 2010 World Cup strike¡± for which he was overlooked, as he was again in 2014.

¡°All the woes of the France team were (the fault of) Samir ? that's fine for five minutes,¡± he said.

¡°Ribery, I understand that, he was dragged through the mud for an extra sports story, he then carried the France team for two years, injured himself and it's said that the France team is better without him, it's a shame that he wasn't given the recognition he deserved,¡± Nasri told Canal+ television.

Ribery and French team-mate and close friend Karim Benzema faced charges of having sex with an under-age prostitute. After a four-year inquiry and a trial, both were cleared.

Bayern Munich player Ribery announced his retirement from France duty after the World Cup in Brazil, which he missed due to a back injury.

¡°Do I watch the France team? That depends if I've nothing else to do, yes. It doesn't interest me,¡± continued Nasri, before adding that nothing could persuade him to play for France again, particularly under coach Didier Deschamps.

¡°As long as he (Deschamps) is with the France team it's finished and even if there was a change in coach, it's finished. I suffered more than anything else in the France team.

¡°In the beginning I was excited and proud to wear the French team jersey, but after when I see the people, the hypocrites, who surround the France team, no it doesn't give me the slightest desire.¡± ? AFP