Gateshead 2 - Warrington Town 0: Conference side dream big after FA Cup third round win


And chairman Graham Wood, who watched their defeat by Tottenham as a schoolboy in January 1955, can now dream of facing another big-name team next month.

Goals from Matty Pattison and Danny Wright ended Warrington's cup adventure yesterday but Gateshead manager Gary Mills is planning to extend his team's run.

Mills said: "Sixty years is a hell of a long time and I'm so so pleased for my chairman. He's a massive Gateshead fan and was there last time as a kid.

"He's going to love me for saying this - but now he's an OAP who will see his side in the third round again."

Mills, who won the European Cup as a Nottingham Forest player, said:" We like these big games and want more of them. We will have an even bigger game in the third round now.


"A lot of my players will want Newcastle, Sunderland or Manchester United but Forest would be really special for me."

The outcome was never really in doubt from the moment Gateshead broke through for the first time after only eight minutes.

Rob Ramshaw created the goal with an incisive break down the right before his cross was lashed in by former Newcastle winger Matt Pattison.

It was the start of a torrid spell for Warrington. Within the next 90 seconds, John Oster - 36 today - should have added a second goal and keeper Karl Wills saved well from Alex Rodman.

Pattison and Wright also hit the post in the second half and Warrington had not seriously troubled Gateshead keeper Adam Bartlett by the time Wright settled the tie in stoppage time, turning the ball into the empty net after Wills slipped when he attempted to kick clear.

I couldn't be more proud of what we have achieved when you look at where we are in the pyramid
Warrington manager Shaun Reid
Warrington manager Shaun Reid said:"I couldn't be more proud of what we have achieved when you look at where we are in the pyramid.

"We had a belief we could win but, on the day, we weren't good enough. We accept that but the players gave us everything. They are hurting at the moment but we will bounce back."

Non-League Dover shocked Cheltenham to book their place in the third round thanks to a late goal from skipper Connor Essam.

The former Crawley and Gillingham defender threaded his shot beyond keeper Trevor Carson in the 82nd minute to send the Conference side through at the expense of the League Two outfit.

Worcester are also in the hat after coming from behind to draw 1-1 at Scunthorpe.

The Conference North side, who knocked out Coventry in round one, were trailing to Paddy Madden's 10th goal of the season.

But the picture changed dramatically in the opening minute of the second half when striker Daniel Nti lashed home an equaliser from close range after the home defence had failed to deal with a left-wing cross.

