Lionel Messi scores hat-trick, 400th Barcelona goal

Lionel Messi scored yet another hat-trick and surpassed 400 club goals as Barcelona came from behind to win the Catalan derby 5-1 against Espanyol in La Liga on Sunday.
The Argentine, who holds the La Liga and Champions League scoring records, produced a now familiar devastating performance to take his record to 402 goals for Barca in all competitions, including 28 in friendlies.
Messi produced his tour de force just a day after Cristiano Ronaldo, his rival for title of world¡¯s best player, scored a La Liga record 23rd hat-trick against Celta Vigo in a 3-0 win for leaders Real Madrid.
The win left Barca in second place in La Liga, two points behind Real.
Messi may have two fewer La Liga hat-tricks than Ronaldo but he has 29 to the Portuguese striker¡¯s 27 in official matches for their Spanish clubs.
Former Barca player Sergio Garcia put Espanyol ahead at the Nou Camp but Messi, who had earlier hit the crossbar with a free kick, equalised before halftime, his landmark 400th goal coming with a clinical strike from the edge of the area.
Shortly after the break, Luis Suarez found the Argentine and he again hit the corner of the net from a similar distance.
Espanyol were in disarray and Gerard Pique was allowed a free header from a corner to add to the lead after 53 minutes.
Substitute Pedro latched onto a long ball from Jordi Alba to grab another and, with nine minutes remaining, he set up Messi for a brilliantly executed third.
¡°Until the first goal the game was at a slow tempo which is what we are used to as rivals just pack the defence,¡± Barca coach Luis Enrique told a news conference.
¡°When we conceded, the doubts came and we couldn¡¯t find an end product to our play. The key came with the goal before the break and then after that it was all a lot easier.¡±
David Moyes, the former Manchester United manager, suffered his first defeat as coach of Real Sociedad as they were crushed 4-0 at Villarreal.
The floodgates opened in the second half after an Enaut Zubikarai own goal, with Denis Cheryshev adding another before a late double from Moi Gomez.
Valencia¡¯s Champions League hopes took a further blow as they were held 1-1 away to Granada and lie fifth on 25 points.
Alvaro Negredo scored his first goal in a Valencia shirt but the visitors were then reduced to 10 men with Paco Alcacer sent off in the 86th and Isaac Success grabbed an equaliser two minutes from the end.

