Tiger practice pays off late versus No. 18 Arkansas

CLEMSON --- Rod Hall made sure Clemson basketball's season wasn't being written off just yet. That extra drive late, he says, can be traced back to a long week of practice.

The Tigers dropped a third game in seven contests --- and a second in four at home on Monday to Rutgers, losing a lead with four minutes to go for the 69-64 defeat.

Down six with under a minute left in the second half, the familiar feeling was there against No. 18 Arkansas.

Hall had other ideas.

He drove to the hoop for a layup to cut into the deficit with 55 ticks left, and then in a full-court trap, made the steal-and-bucket again for a single-possession game. Clemson switched up defenses again in the half-court for a 1-3-1 zone --- where a second steal in 30 seconds led to Jaron Blossomgame's run-out hoop to tie it up, 57-all before the buzzer.

"In practice we talked about our effort and some of those games we lost because of our effort," the senior guard Hall said. "Came down to 50/50 balls and we weren't getting them. Other team was getting extra possessions and that was the key to the game."

"I thought we had an outstanding week of practice," Clemson coach Brad Brownell said. "Just trying to focus on energy and effort. We haven't been as good that way for long periods of games and it cost us. I thought our guys were keyed up going against a really good team in Arkansas. Certainly the last minute of the game, our guys made plays. Got to even up and Rod was tremendous in overtime and really the difference in the game for us."

Indeed he was, the Augusta product scored 7-of-11 Tiger points in the OT session, while the Clemson 'D' locked down --- the Razorbacks missing 3-of-9 shots bonus basketball shots --- and without a good-look at the end --- in a 68-65 loss.

"I really wanted the win," Hall said, who finished with a team-best 19 points and four steals. "My teammates had been working hard and had some downtimes from the games we lost and we just wanted to regroup."

It's a performance the Tigers' fifth-year coach was waiting on from Hall --- a "heart-to-heart" conversation mixed in this last week. Hall had totaled four double-digit scoring efforts but just one of 15 or more points.

"He's played fine," Brownell said, "but he hasn't played with a big heart and a big spirit. He's not an outgoing guy, so it's not natural for him to be out there. He's a humble guy. He doesn't get too high about playing great."

Blossomgame (17) and freshman Donte Grantham (14) joined Hall in double-figures scoring. Clemson narrowly out-shot Arkansas, 41.4-39.1 with a plus-eight rebound margin.

A combination of change in venue and maybe road weariness got the best of Arkansas in the first half.

The Razorbacks suffered their first defeat on Thursday at Iowa State before heading to the Palmetto State. Hosting Clemson last year, Arkansas led by eight at the half, putting up 40, hanging on to a 74-68 win.

The Tigers shot close to 60 percent for the first 10 minutes of action and a Rod Hall 3-pointer gave Clemson a nine-point edge with under two to go.

Scoring the final five points of the first half, the Razorbacks trailed by just four, 29-25. Clemson cooled to 41 percent shooting.

"To be honest, I thought we should have had a big lead at halftime," Brownell said. "We outplayed them in the first half and really should have had an eight to 10-point lead."

"Arkansas got away from us but then thankfully our defense picked back up. I thought our defense in the last six minutes of the game and into overtime was good."

The ranked win was only the second in program history at home over a non-conference opponent. It was also a first over Arkansas, now with a win over each SEC program in school history. Clemson is 2-0 against SEC teams this season with dates with Auburn at home (12/14) and a trip to South Carolina (12/19) coming up.
