Breakers preparations for Wildcats blown off course by wild weather

The Breakers today launched preparations for the biggest game of their season without key import Ekene Ibekwe whose travel plans were undone by Sydney's stormy weather.

Ibekwe had elected to take a later flight back from Sydney on Sunday following Saturday night's 82-69 defeat to the Kings that snapped the club's five-game ANBL win streak.

But when wild weather struck, Ibekwe found his flight cancelled and the 2.08m US-born Nigerian was forced to stay an extra night across the Tasman.

"It was one of the last days with his girlfriend, and he was going to take a later flight that night and just have a quick look around Sydney. Then the thunderstorms hit," coach Dean Vickerman said today.

The Breakers went through their paces today without either Ibekwe or Alex Pledger who was on rehab duty with his ongoing turf toe problem.

Vickerman was not unduly concerned by his fast-improving backup centre missing a day's practice and the upside was he got to rest up an ankle that was giving him some grief following the loss to the Kings that saw the 9-4 Breakers slip out of top spot.

That position is now occupied by defending champions the Perth Wildcats who just happen to be the Breakers' next opponents in a Thursday night top-of-the-table blockbuster at Vector Arena.

With the No 1 spot on the line, not to mention the chance to make it two from two over their at times bitter rivals, Vickerman didn't mind admitting it was a big occasion for the Breakers who would also be honouring Mika Vukona's record-equalling 250th game for the club.

A fairly high-intensity training session to start the week was a good sign, the coach hoped.

"It's a rivalry game for us, it's a top-of-the table clash, Mika is playing his 250th game for the club which equals [Paul Henare's] record ¡¦ there's a lot to play for this week. But we've been pretty good if we've had a poor performance in the next one and hopefully today is an indication of what's to come on Thursday."

Vickerman was hopeful the poor showing against the Kings would be just the wakeup call needed against the defending champions who have a very good record in regular season visits to Auckland.

The Breakers were woeful from the land of three against the Kings, making just two of 20 attempts, and also gave up 18 offensive rebounds in a 48-37 shellacking on the boards.

They were the two main concerns Vickerman took out of the game review.

"We weren't bad defensively. We did some things we wanted to do better: we didn't give too many up in the open court, and we did a better job in guarding [Josh] Childress. [Ben] Madgen made some tough shots and their bench stepped up, but we did enough defensively to still be able to win that basketball game.

"We were disappointed with the way we shot the basketball and the way we rebounded the basketball as well. They're the two big key ones.

"We're going to face a team that's going to pressure us this week and we've got to be able to deal with it and still execute under pressure."

Vickerman was not unduly concerned by the cold shooting from beyond the arc against the Kings, as the tape review showed that most of those shots were the right sort of looks.

"We missed a lot of threes, but 20 threes is a low number for us - under what we average for the season, We didn't really settle for it ? I thought we had good looks but just didn't make 'em," he said.

As ever the formula will remain a simple one against the Wildcats who bring a pretty consistent effort whenever they play.

You have to take care of the ball against their pressure defence, you have to keep them off the offensive boards and you have to match their physicality.

The Breakers might like to add a fourth ingredient after their Sydney misfires ? they also need to knock down their triples.

With just under 5000 tickets already sold for Thursday's night's clash at Vector, a season-best crowd looks on the cards.

