Ducks take a longer route to fourth straight victory

WINNIPEG, Manitoba ? Since the Ducks prefer to accomplish things on the ice with the greatest of difficulty, it made perfect sense for Kyle Palmieri to add the next-to-impossible in a Sunday matinee on the Canadian prairie.
Palmieri brought a stunning end to the proceedings at MTS Centre with a sharp-angle shot through a small hole that Winnipeg goalie Ondrej Pavelec left 53 seconds into overtime, giving the continually resilient Ducks a 4-3 victory over the Jets.
It gave the Ducks (18-6-5) a sweep of their two-game road set to the icy north, four straight wins overall and seven in their past nine after a two-week stretch where they dropped games left and right in extra time. They¡¯ve now played in an NHL-leading 11 beyond regulation.
¡°Every time we win in overtime, it¡¯s always fun,¡± goalie Frederik Andersen said. ¡°It¡¯s huge. Even though we would like the two points in regulation, we¡¯ll take them any way they come.
¡°Two points is what we¡¯re here to get, and we got them.¡±
With those two, the Ducks have 41 and are at the top of the NHL standings. Palmieri provided that by getting the puck from Ryan Getzlaf and threading the needle over Pavelec¡¯s left shoulder from below the left circle near the goal line.
¡°I just took a quick look at the net and kind of just saw him low on his post,¡± Palmieri said. ¡°I¡¯ve gone out on enough goalie practices (to see) that a goalie low on his post, it¡¯s going to be hard for him to get it up top.
¡°It came off perfectly off my stick. I was surprised at how well it went up. It was definitely nice.¡±
And it became another win for a team that¡¯s pushed on through the many adverse situations it has encountered. The Ducks, who are on an offensive uptick, put four past Pavelec despite not having star Corey Perry because of a knee injury suffered Friday against Minnesota.
Rene Bourque got his first since joining the team and Jakob Silfverberg scored for the second straight game after getting just one in his first 26. Ryan Kesler also got his third in two games as the Ducks scored twice on their often-faulty power play.
The Ducks needed to get their game going with the man advantage as referees Brian Pochmara and Chris Rooney were busy with their whistles, with the teams getting a combined five power plays in the first, eight by the end of the second and 12 total.
The scores by Bourque and Kesler in six chances ended a 1-for-29 drought.
¡°It¡¯s big,¡± Getzlaf said. ¡°Especially in a game like that when you¡¯re having power plays all the time. You can take a lot of momentum away from your group if you¡¯re not on. That was good to see.
¡°I thought we had other chances. We could have had a couple of more even. That¡¯s good stuff. Good sign for us.¡±
Silfverberg and Kesler pushed the Ducks into the lead in the second period after Andrew Ladd opened it with the Jets¡¯ second power-play goal of the game. Silfverberg neatly deflected in Clayton Stoner¡¯s point shot and Kesler put in a one-timer with the man advantage.