Live: Patriots rally past Chargers, 23-14

The Patriots¡¯ defense did its job, shutting the Chargers out in the second half, and Tom Brady hit Julian Edelman for a long touchdown pass in the fourth quarter as the New England earned a 23-14 comeback win in San Diego on Sunday Night Football.

With the victory, the Patriots improve to 10-3 and maintain their hold as the top team in the AFC for home-field advantage in the playoffs.

Down 14-13 at the half, the Patriots took a 16-14 lead on Stephen Gostkowski¡¯s third field goal of the game early in the fourth quarter.

Brady then applied the dagger when he made a play-action fake and hit Edelman over the middle, and Edelman broke a tackle and outraced everyone for a 69-yard touchdown.

For the game, Brady completed 28-of-44 passes for 317 yards and two touchdowns, the first coming on a 14-yarder to Rob Gronkowski in the second quarter. Brady also threw an interception to Manti Te¡¯o in the second quarter that ended a scoring threat.

The defense limited Philip Rivers to 189 yards passing with a touchdown pass to Malcom Floyd and an interception by Akeem Ayers.

Jamie Collins made a pair of sacks for the Patriots.

Brady-to-Edelman TD gives Patriots 23-14 lead over Chargers

It took just one play, but the Patriots took a 23-14 lead when Tom Brady hit Julian Edelman for a 69-yard touchdown with 8:41 to play in the fourth quarter.

After forcing a San Diego punt, the Patriots immediately went to the air to increase their lead. Brady used a play-action fake to freeze defenders and hit Edelman over the middle, who broke a tackle midfield and outraced everyone to the end zone.

Gostkowski FG gives Patriots 16-14 lead over Chargers

Stephen Gostkowski hit his third field goal of the game, this time from 38 yards, as the Patriots took a 16-14 lead over the Chargers with 10:34 to play in the fourth quarter.

The 10-play, 55-yard drive took 5:04 off the clock after starting late in the third quarter.

Tom Brady started the drive with consecutive 9-yard completions to Rob Gronkowski.

To start the fourth quarter, Brady found Julian Edelman for 4 yards then Brandon LaFell for 9 yards.

A defensive holding penalty gave the Patriots a first down at the Chargers¡¯ 44-yard line. Two plays later, Brady hit Edelman for a 14-yard gain.

After a 3-yard loss on a run by LeGarrette Blount, Brady hit Edelman yet again for 10 yards. On third and 3, Brady tried to hit LaFell on the back shoulder, but the ball sailed out of bounds and incomplete to force the field goal.

Another three and out as Patriots trail Chargers, 14-13

Another three and out left the Patriots trailing the Chargers, 14-13, late in the third quarter.

A third down pass by Tom Brady intended for Rob Gronkowski fell incomplete as the Patriots went three and out for the fourth time in the second half.

Following a series of penalties, Akeem Ayers halted a San Diego drive when he intercepted a Philip Rivers pass over the middle.

The Chargers moved downfield thanks to an unsportsmanlike penalty on Brian Tyms and an unnecessary roughness call on Brandon Browner. The flag on Browner wiped out what would have been a 56-yard interception return for a touchdown by Devin McCourty.

Patriots, Chargers go three and out to start third quarter

Neither the Patriots nor the Chargers could do anything with their first drives of the second half, as each went three and out to leave San Diego with a 14-13 lead to start the third quarter.

The Patriots took the second-half kickoff and after a 9-yard completion from Tom Brady to Rob Gronkowski, LeGarrette Blount was stopped for no gain as New England was forced to punt.

The Chargers then took over at their own 13-yard line and an 8-yard completion from Philip Rivers to Donald Brown on third down fell short of the first down to force another punt.

Patriots trail Chargers at half, 14-13

It was a first half filled with mistakes and missed opportunities for the Patriots as the Chargers took a 14-13 advantage into the break on Sunday Night Football.

At the end of the half, the Patriots had a chance to take the lead, but Tom Brady¡¯s pass from the San Diego 18-yard line was intercepted by Manti Te¡¯o.

For the half, the Patriots had four trips inside the Chargers¡¯ red zone and came away with that turnover, two Stephen Gostkowski field goals and a 14-yard touchdown pass to Rob Gronkowski.

The touchdown pass came after Brandon Bolden blocked a Mike Scifres punt.

Brady completed 14-of-25 passes for 166 yards, as Gronkowski caught three passes for 55 yards and Julian Edelman caught four for 41.

San Diego took a 14-3 lead after Philip Rivers hit Malcom Floyd for a 15-yard touchdown and Darrell Stuckey recovered a Brandon LaFell fumble and returned it 53 yards for another score.

LeGarrette Blount leads New England on the ground with 11 rushes for 46 yards.

Gronkowski TD cuts Chargers' lead over Patriots to 14-13

Tom Brady found Rob Gronkowski for a 14-yard touchdown pass as the Patriots cut the Chargers¡¯ lead to 14-13 with 3:28 to play in the first half.

Brandon Bolden gave the Patriots a huge spark when he blocked a Mike Scifres punt to give New England the ball at the Chargers¡¯ 25-yard line.

LeGarrette Blount bulled ahead for 7 yards on the first two downs before Brady scrambled to the left for a 5-yard gain to the San Diego 14-yard line.

On the next play, Brady hit Gronkowski on a back-shoulder throw by the left pylon for the score.

Gostkowski FG cuts Chargers' lead over Patriots to 14-6

For the second time, the Patriots got inside the Chargers¡¯ 5-yard line only to come away with a field goal as a Stephen Gostkowski 22-yard boot cut the San Diego advantage to 14-6 with 7:38 left in the first half.

On the first play of the drive, Tom Brady hit Julian Edelman for a 13-yard completion. On the next play, Brady hit Rob Gronkowski on the left side, and Gronkowski rumbled for a 30-yard gain.

After an incomplete pass intended for Tim Wright, Brady threw to Gronkowski again but he was held to put the ball at the San Diego 26-yard line.

Two plays later, Brady found Brandon LaFell for an 11-yard gain. Brady tossed it to Danny Amendola for 4 yards and then Edelman for 7 yards to set up first and goal from the Chargers¡¯ 4.

LeGarrette Blount was stopped for no gain on the next play before Brady threw an incompletion toward Edelman at the goal line. On third and goal, Brady threw to the left and San Diego linebacker Manti Te¡¯o dropped a deflected pass to force the field goal attempt.

Fumble return for TD gives Chargers 14-3 lead over Patriots

The Chargers increased their lead to 14-3 when Jahleel Addae stripped the ball loose from Brandon LaFell and Darrell Stuckey returned the fumble 53 yards for a touchdown.

On the third-and-3 play, Tom Brady found LaFell over the middle, but LaFell couldn¡¯t hang on as Addae forced the fumble and Stuckey picked it up and took off for the score.

LaFell picked up a first down earlier in the drive when he caught a 19-yard pass from Brady.

Rivers TD pass gives Chargers 7-3 lead over Patriots

The Chargers answered a New England scoring drive with a 15-yard touchdown pass from Philip Rivers to Malcom Floyd to take a 7-3 lead with 13:29 to play in the first half.

The drive got going when a facemask penalty on Brandon Browner put the ball at the San Diego 37-yard line. Philip Rivers then hit Antonio Gates for a 12-yard completion over the middle on a crossing pattern. Three plays later, Rivers hit Ladarius Green on a similar pattern for an 11-yard gain to the Patriots¡¯ 39-yard line.

On the first play of the second quarter, Ryan Mathews broke through for a 17-yard run, then ran the ball again for 3 yards. Rivers overthrew Floyd to the left side of the end zone on the next play, but then found a diving Floyd for the score on the right side with Browner in coverage.

Gostkowski FG gives Patriots 3-0 lead over Chargers

Stephen Gostkowski booted a 22-yard field goal with 3:15 to play in the first quarter to give the Patriots an early, 3-0 lead over the Chargers in San Diego on Sunday Night Football.

The field goal completed a 17-play, 89-yard drive in which LeGarrette Blount rushed for 39 yards.

Faced with a third and 12 from the Patriots' own 5-yard line to start the drive, Tom Brady moved to his right and threw to Julian Edelman for a 19-yard pickup. Two plays later, Brady dumped the ball off to Blount, and Blount broke a tackle and picked up 11 yards.

Blount then picked up another first down on an 11-yard run and an illegal hands to the face penalty gave the Patriots another. Brady swung a pass to the left and Shane Vereen picked up 9 yards before Blount ran for another 9 yards and a first down two plays later.

Jonas Gray then powered forward for 9 yards on two carries and Blount picked up the first down with a 3-yard gain. Blount then rumbled up the middle for 9 yards to give the Patriots second and goal from the Chargers' 2. But a Brady incompletion and a sack by San Diego's Melvin Ingram forced a field goal attempt.

Shareece Wright blocked the kick and the ball was returned for a touchdown, but Wright was offside and Gostkowski had another chance and drilled it through the uprights to give the Patriots the lead.

Philip Rivers got the Chargers' opening possession off to a nice start when he hit Donald Brown for a 15-yard completion to convert on third and 5. Ryan Mathews followed with a 10-yard run, but the drive stalled when Jamie Collins broke through the center of the San Diego line and sacked Rivers for a 9-yard loss.


