Kyle Palmieri's OT winner sends Ducks to 4th straight victory

WINNIPEG, Manitoba -- All Kyle Palmieri needed was a glance at the net.

Palmieri's shot past Ondrej Pavelec 53 seconds into overtime lifted the Anaheim Ducks over the Winnipeg Jets 4-3 on Sunday afternoon.

"I took a quick look at the net and saw him down on his post so I just tried to get it up and I was lucky enough to put it up inside the bar," Palmieri said. "I knew I could try and at least have him make a save. It was me just putting it on net."

Ryan Getzlaf added three assists for Anaheim (18-6-5), including the assist on Palmieri's game winner, to extend his point streak to five games. Getzlaf has two goals and eight assists during his current streak.

Getzlaf said that Anaheim's resiliency all year has been a key to their success.

"Our group has showed that all year, that we've been able to play through things and keep on playing," Getzlaf said. "Good or bad, one thing we've done is play a lot of overtime games this year so we know the situation we are in."

Rene Bourque scored his first of the year for the Ducks and Jakob Silfverberg and Ryan Kesler also scored goals.

Jacob Trouba, Dustin Byfuglien and Andrew Ladd scored for Winnipeg (14-9-5). Two of the Jets' three goals came on the power play. Pavelec made 21 saves.

"It's getting better," Mathieu Perreault said of Winnipeg's power play. "We've been talking about it so much and been working on it a lot and it's finally starting to going in for us. We have seen some good things and we want to keep working on it."

Anaheim has won four straight. The loss snaps the Jets' two-game win streak. Winnipeg earned points in its last six games, going 4-0-2 dating back to Oct. 26.

Goalie Frederik Andersen made 27 saves in his 15th consecutive start for the Ducks. Andersen said he is happy with the two points and isn't worried about the workload.

"We have two days off between the next two games, so maybe tomorrow I'll do a little rehab," he said. "It's fun. It's something you learn from a lot. You always learn from playing, you don't learn from sitting on the bench."

Anaheim struck first on the power play after Byfuglien was sent to the penalty box for holding. Bourque scored at 11:02 of the first period.

Byfuglien redeemed himself later in the period, scoring his seventh of the year on the power play to tie the game 1-1 at 14:28 of the first.

The Jets broke the tie 1:33 in the second period on the power play. Ladd scored his 10th of the season to give the Jets a 2-1 lead.

"I find we get more awake when the other team gets the lead," said Anaheim head coach Bruce Boudreau. "We were sleepwalking a little bit and then they made it 2-1 in the second. We ended up with Palmieri making a great shot and Freddie making some great saves."

The Ducks tied it up three minutes later on a tip in by Silfverberg in the high slot off Clayton Stoner's point shot.

Matt Beleskey had a goal waved off after being called for interference. Kesler gave the Ducks a 3-2 lead 40 seconds later with Trouba in the box for the Jets. It was Kesler's ninth goal of the year.

Trouba scored his fourth of the season at 15:15 of the third to tie the game 3-3. Trouba went end-to-end on the goal, getting his own rebound on Andersen's initial save before putting it past him.

The Jets are on the road for two divisional games starting with the Dallas Stars on Tuesday night. Anaheim returns home for the start of a home-and-home with the Edmonton Oilers on Wednesday.

