Russell Wilson and the Seahawks ran away from the Eagles on Sunday. 
(USATSI)
If it wasn't already clear, it should be abundantly apparent now: the Seahawks defense is back to championship form. After holding the Cardinals and 49ers to six points total -- an NFL modern miracle -- Pete Carroll's crew completely snuffed out Chip Kelly's high-powered offense.

The Eagles averaged 5.7 yards per play coming into the game and a league-leading 72.9 plays per game.

They did not do ... that on Sunday.

EAGLES OFFENSIVE OUTPUT
POINTS/GAME	YARDS/GAME	YARDS/PLAY	PLAYS/GAME
PHI Weeks 1-13	31.2	416.2	5.7	72.9
PHI Week 14	14	139	125.2	45
A Kelly-run offense has never been held under 140 yards, college included. That's a lot of football games where defenses couldn't manage to shut down Kelly's offense and Seattle did it on Sunday.

They were physical across the board and dominated the line of scrimmage, holding the Eagles to 2.6 yards per carry. LeSean McCoy averaged over 6 yards per carry the last two weeks; he averaged 2.9 Sunday. Darren Sproles was a non factor in the game.

Philly's receivers never had a chance to do anything deep and were utterly blanketed down the field all night long. Jordan Matthews, Jeremy Maclin and Riley Cooper combined to finish with 8 catches and 57 yards. Suffocating.


This is what we saw from Seattle as they stormed to a Super Bowl victory last season. They're heating up at the perfect time and opponents should be very afraid. Even scarier? Seattle took its defense on the road this week.

NFC playoff implications

The Seahawks win didn't actually bump them up the NFC standings, per se, but it does have massive long-term playoff implications.

Seattle looks like a lock to make the postseason; with three weeks to go they're in a group of four teams at 9-4 (pending Packers-Falcons). There's still one team that will be odd man out in the NFC, but Seattle has a tiebreaker over the Eagles now.

Their win sets up a HUGE game between the Cowboys and Eagles for first place in the NFC East (once again).

The Cardinals snuck one out against the Chiefs, which meant Seattle needed to keep pace. They did and could have a shot in two weeks to take over the NFC West ... and maybe even the top spot in the NFC.

Trojan Horse

It sure was nice to see Pete Carroll and Mark Sanchez reunite after so many years apart (Carroll coached the Sanchize at USC, obviously). The grasshopper got kicked around the field, however.

Sanchez finished with a pair of touchdown passes, including a very nice throw down the field to Zach Ertz for a 35-yard score. But that score accounted for nearly a third of his 96 total yards. Credit the defense, clearly, but the Eagles couldn't ever open up the offense with Sanchez under center.

Seattle recognized it too.


Nick Foles is very much in play once he's healthy.

Russell'n

Russell Wilson is far from a "perfect quarterback" or "traditional signal caller." He can play in the pocket but the dude loves to scramble and improvise. He gets ripped for that -- a lot -- but half the time the Seahawks need his improvisational offensive ability. Such was the case on Sunday, when Wilson ran for 48 yards on 10 carries and a score.

The beauty of Wilson's ability to run is the Seahawks don't depend on it, thanks to Marshawn Lynch's power run game. So when they do unleash the read option, it's deadly.


Wilson can operate from the pocket just fine, though, thanks. His third quarter touchdown toss to Doug Baldwin was a straight dime and it served as the final scoring play of the game.


He's been quietly been picking up his efficiency the last few weeks and produced a quality "volume" game on Sunday in Philadelphia.

If Wilson gets real warm to go along with Seattle's defense it's going to be a problem for the NFC.

From the rest of the NFL:

Next-Level Trollwork

It was already obvious how badly Jeff Fisher hosed the Redskins in the trade to get them Robert Griffin III in the 2012 NFL Draft. He didn't need to rub it in.

But he did anyway, sending out the six players on the Rams roster acquired by the picks Washington sent over in exchange for the rights to grab Griffin.

Specifically, Fisher trotted out Janoris Jenkins, Michael Brockers, Zac Stacy, Stedman Bailey, Greg Robinson and Alec Ogletree to greet the Skins at midfield.


And then he proceeded to destroy the Redskins to the point of Jay Gruden being forced to put RG3 -- recently benched, again -- into the game for Colt McCoy.

Not that it mattered. A slew of injuries and a lack of depth on the roster (which was created by the lack of draft picks from that very trade!) leads to situations where rookie tackle Morgan Moses doesn't even flinch as all-world pass rusher Robert Quinn blows by him for a sack.


It's a miracle McCoy held onto the ball. It's also a miracle the Redskins are even functioning as a franchise at this point. Washington is a walking soap opera. The Redskins are in worse shape than the Raiders.


Gruden may or may not get fired after his first year for not working with Griffin properly. What's the end game there though? Why hire him in the first place? (And why even take the job in the first place, Jay?)

Burn through another coach and for what? You can't blow things up because you can't blow up a non-existent structure. The Redskins aren't even a lean-to at this point. Or even a shanty.

Just a pile of random lumber sitting on an empty half acre of swampland.

Washington mortgaged the future for Griffin and found some success in his rookie year. But doubling down on the strategy of using an offense designed to make him succeed right away and then selling him down the river by putting him back in against the Seahawks derailed any progress he might find.

The natural erosion of talent was never more apparent than when Fisher trotted out more than a quarter of his starting roster to midfield, all acquired in exchange for the Redskins latest mistake.

Start Johnny Football

Mike Pettine set himself up pretty nicely for this past week. Start Brian Hoyer. If he stinks and/or you get down big, roll out Johnny Manziel. If he plays OK you fight in the game and try to beat the Colts.

He apparently couldn't conceive of the Browns getting up big, leaving Hoyer in and watching his team choke away a 21-7 second half lead.

Welp, that's what happened and time's come to pony up and play the kid. Whether or not Manziel is ¡°ready¡± (ha?) or he's been going to basketball games (who cares?) is irrelevant.

Brian Hoyer hasn't thrown a touchdown pass since November 16. What do you need to see here? Over Hoyer's last four games he's completed 49.7 percent of his 151 pass attempts for 984 yards, 1 touchdown and 8 interceptions.

The ¡°he just wins games¡± excuse is out too, because Cleveland's 1-3 in that stretch and quickly fading from AFC playoff relevance.

At one point Sunday, Hoyer missed a WIDE open Josh Gordon streaking down the sideline, overthrowing the receiver (who might now be catching heat leaked from within the organization) on a first down that would've sealed the deal if he catches him in stride.


Immediately after the play, FOX's cameras cut to Pettine looking miffed on the sideline and then Manziel who mouthed ¡¦ something.


There are plenty of theories out there about what he said but it sure does look like ¡°I would have [bleep]ing hit him.¡±

Kudos to Michael Shamburger of The Big Lead for doing a slow-down, zoom-in look at Manziel's mouth because DAMMIT WE NEED TO KNOW, MAN.


But really we do need to know. Does Manziel hate Hoyer? He probably does. Would he have hit Gordon on a fairly simple go route? My guess is yes.

The only way to find out is to put him in the freaking game.