NFL results, Dec. 7

Cam Newton passed for three touchdowns and appeared to incite a scuffle with frustrated New Orleans after going over the pile for another score, and the Panthers ended a six-game skid with a 41-10 rout of the host Saints on Sunday.
¡°Victory is always a sweet feeling, but we can¡¯t be complacent about this,¡± Newton said. ¡°We were doing the things that we are supposed to do.¡±
Jonathan Stewart added a 69-yard touchdown as the Panthers (4-8-1) pulled closer to NFC South leader Atlanta (5-7), which plays at Green Bay on Monday night.
Newton¡¯s jawing and ¡°Superman¡± celebration of his 2-yard rushing touchdown in the first quarter drew a shove from linebacker Curtis Lofton. That ignited a scrum that eventually went into a tunnel beyond the end zone.
Newton chalked up the extracurricular roughness to nothing more than ¡°a lot of testosterone on that field at one time.¡±
Carolina tight end Brandon Williams was ejected for punching Cam Jordan, but the Panthers kept rolling.
Newton¡¯s scoring passes went to Kelvin Benjamin, Greg Olsen and Fozzy Whitaker.
New Orleans (5-8) lost its fourth straight home game to drop a half-game behind Atlanta.
Ravens 28, Dolphins 13: After falling behind by 10 points and not picking up a first down in the first quarter, visiting Baltimore took control. The Ravens had consecutive touchdown drives of 97 and 75 yards in the second and third quarters to grab a 14-10 lead. ... The Ravens finished with 26 first downs and outgained Miami 425-161 in the final three periods. Joe Flacco went 25-for-33 for 269 yards, threw for two scores and ran for a third, and overcame an interception in the end zone. ... Elvis Dumervil had 3¨ö of Baltimore¡¯s six sacks, and the Dolphins totaled only 249 yards. ... On the go-ahead drive, the Ravens made a first down on 4th-and-1 in their territory. Later, leading 14-13 and threatening again, Flacco¡¯s fumble while attempting to pass was ruled an incomplete pass upon review and Justin Forsett scored on the next play. ... The victory gives Baltimore (8-5) a significant edge over Miami (7-6) in the AFC¡¯s tight scramble for a wild-card playoff berth. The Ravens are a half-game back of Cincinnati (8-4-1) in the AFC North.
Lions 34, Buccaneers 17: Matthew Stafford threw for 311 yards and three touchdowns ? including one off a fluky deflection late in the game ? for host Detroit. ... The Lions (9-4) trail first-place Green Bay by a half-game in the NFC North. ... Tampa Bay (2-11) was finally eliminated from playoff contention ? the NFC South¡¯s mediocrity could keep the Bucs in it for only so long. They committed three turnovers in the second quarter against Detroit and did not lead. ... Calvin Johnson had eight catches for 158 yards and a touchdown for Detroit, which snapped a nine-game losing streak in December.
Texans 27, Jaguars 13: Arian Foster ran for 127 yards and a touchdown, and Houston beat Jacksonville (2-11) to pick up consecutive wins for the first time since Week 2. ... Foster¡¯s 1-yard run on the second play of the fourth quarter gave Houston (7-6) a comfortable cushion after trailing 13-10 at halftime. ... After quarterback Ryan Fitzpatrick got stuffed on third down, the Texans lined up for a field goal before calling time out and deciding to go for it. Foster started right and looked like he would be stopped for a loss, but he eluded a tackle, cut back the other way and high-stepped into the end zone.
Rams 24, Washington 0: Visiting
St. Louis (6-7) posted back-to-back shutouts for the first time since 1945, givingthe Rams their first win streak of the season. The Rams blanked the Raiders 52-0 the previous Sunday. ... Jared Cook caught two touchdown passes, Tavon Austin returned a punt 78 yards for a score, and St. Louis¡¯ defense allowed 206 total yards. ... Colt McCoy suffered a neck injury on his sixth sack just before the two-minute warning, so Washington (3-10) turned to Robert Griffin III to finish two weeks after benching him. Washington lost its fifth straight game. ... A week after their ¡°Hands Up, Don¡¯t Shoot!¡± show of solidarity, several Rams players wrote the message ¡°I Can¡¯t Breathe¡± on various parts of their uniforms in a tribute to Eric Garner, who died after a New York police officer placed him in a choke hold during an arrest for selling loose cigarettes. Players at other NFL games expressed similar sentiments.
Vikings 30, Jets 24: Jarius Wright¡¯s 87-yard touchdown reception on a bubble screen from Teddy Bridgewater in overtime gave host Minnesota (6-7) the win. ... Former Vikings receiver Percy Harvin had a 35-yard touchdown reception and a 47-yard kickoff return while finishing with 124 yards on six catches for the Jets (2-11) before leaving with an ankle injury. ... Nick Folk¡¯s fifth field goal came with 23 seconds left in the fourth quarter.
Giants 36, Titans 7: Eli Manning threw for 260 yards and a touchdown, and visiting New York (4-9) snapped a seven-game skid. ... Odell Beckham Jr. set a team rookie record with his fourth 100-yard receiving game: 11 catches for 130 yards and a TD. Rookie Andre Williams ran for a season-high 131 yards, including a 50-yard TD. ... Tennessee (2-11) lost its seventh straight, the franchise¡¯s longest skid since losing 11 straight in 1994 as the Houston Oilers.
