Senators 4, Canucks 3 (OT)

Senators 4, Canucks 3 (OT): Mika Zibanejad recorded two goals and two assists, including one on captain Erik Karlsson¡¯s goal 1:21 into overtime as host Ottawa rallied to snap its five-game winless streak.

Zibanejad took a pass from Bobby Ryan and wheeled into the slot before dropping the puck for Karlsson, who whipped it past Eddie Lack for the deciding tally. David Legwand also scored, Ryan finished with three assists and Craig Anderson turned aside 30 shots as the Senators rallied from a 3-0 deficit.

Radim Vrbata recorded a goal and an assist while Brad Richardson and defenseman Kevin Bieksa also scored for the Canucks. Lack made 41 saves as Vancouver lost for the second straight night to drop to 3-3-0 on its seven-game road trip.

Vrbata accepted a long stretch pass from defenseman Ryan Stanton and stopped in the left faceoff circle before stickhandling around Anderson 6:10 into the contest to open the scoring. Bieksa doubled the lead 65 seconds later with a blast from above the slot and Richardson intercepted defenseman Chris Phillips' clearing pass and scored 5:02 into the second session to make it 3-0.

Legwand chipped in a rebound on the power play at 10:53 and Zibanejad circled the net before banking a shot in off both defenseman Yannick Weber and Lack with 5:48 left in the second to close the gap to 3-2. Zibanejad tied the game with 62 seconds to go in the period, pouncing on a loose puck and backhanding it past Lack.

GAME NOTEBOOK: Zibanejad recorded his first multi-goal performance and has scored four times in his last three contests. ¡¦ Vancouver C Shawn Matthias, who collected six points in his previous six games, sat out after taking an elbow to the head from Toronto D Stephane Robidas in Saturday¡¯s contest. ¡¦ Ottawa LW Milan Michalek missed the game with an upper-body injury and D Marc Methot was scratched after returning from injured reserve to play his first two games of the season earlier in the week.

