College Football Playoff: Alabama, Oregon, Florida State and Ohio State are in 

Maybe it's time for a 6-game playoff in college football ? just ask fans of TCU and Baylor.

A 4-team format brought in this year to replace the controversial BCS process and bring clarity to college football's national championship resulted in more confusion and anger ? especially in the Lone Star State ? Sunday when Ohio State leapfrogged the Horned Frogs into the fourth spot.

The four semifinalists announced Sunday were 1. Alabama, 2. Oregon, 3. Florida State and 4. Ohio State. The Buckeyes¡¯ 59-0 win over Wisconsin in the Big Ten title game Saturday night was the final push Urban Meyer¡¯s team needed to get into the final four.

Florida State and quarterback Jameis Winston will get a shot to repeat as national champions.
CHUCK BURTON/AP
Florida State and quarterback Jameis Winston will get a shot to repeat as national champions.
TCU, which entered the weekend in the third spot (Florida State was four and Ohio State was five), and pasted Iowa State, 55-3, Saturday actually got bumped back all the way to 6th. Baylor, the Big 12 co-champs with TCU ? whom they beat in the regular season ? finished fifth.

Ohio State appeared to be finished early in the season when it lost to Virginia Tech on Sept. 6, but it won 11 straight, including a big win at Michigan State and Saturday¡¯s rout of Wisconsin.

Marcus Mariota and Oregon trouce Arizona to win the Pac-12 championship and improve to 11-1.
THEARON W. HENDERSON/GETTY IMAGES
Marcus Mariota and Oregon trouce Arizona to win the Pac-12 championship and improve to 11-1.
TCU¡¯s only loss was to Baylor, while Baylor¡¯s only loss came at the hands of West Virginia.

Alabama, the SEC champs, will take on Ohio State in the Sugar Bowl on Jan. 1, while Oregon, the Pac 12 champs, and Florida State meet in the Rose Bowl that same day.


BUTCH DILL/AP
Amari Cooper are in the ¡®Football Four¡¯ with an 11-1 ranking.
The two winners will meet on Jan. 12.

