The first College Football Playoff expanded the national championship race, made the regular season even more intriguing, and produced a final four with major star power.

Nick Saban’s No. 1 Alabama Crimson Tide vs. Urban Meyer’s No. 4 Ohio State Buckeyes at the Sugar Bowl.

Marcus Mariota, this season’s Heisman Trophy front-runner, and second-seeded Oregon vs. Jameis Winston, last season’s Heisman Trophy winner, and defending national champion Florida State at the Rose Bowl.

The winners will meet on Jan. 12 in Arlington, Texas, at the home of the Dallas Cowboys.

A new era, indeed, but with the same old problems: What is the best way to pick the teams and what should be the criteria?

After six weeks of ranking teams, the selection committee shuffled its deck Sunday and dealt the Big 12 out of the playoff.

‘‘We’re smarting today,’’ Big 12 commissioner Bob Bowlsby said.

TCU, which had been third in the rankings last week, ended up sixth. Big 12 co-champion Baylor moved up a spot to No. 5, but both were squeezed out by Ohio State, which won over the committee with a doozy of a closing statement in its conference championship game: a 59-0 victory over Wisconsin for the Big Ten title.

‘‘I would say that it is human nature that the most recent thing that occurs, in this case the most-recent achievements, are the most impactful,’’ Bowlsby said. ‘‘Ohio State’s victory over Wisconsin was complete domination, and in that regard they played their way into the position they now enjoy.’’

The Big 12 is the only one of the big-five leagues without a championship game, but it’s also the only one in which every team plays each other. Baylor and TCU (both 11-1, 8-1 Big 12) were declared co-champions, even though the Bears beat the Horned Frogs, 61-58, on Oct. 11.

The Big 12 can’t hold a championship game because it has only 10 teams; current NCAA rules require conferences with 12 teams split into two divisions to play a title game.

‘‘We’re in a room that feels like we just lost a football game. That to me is a travesty,’’ Baylor coach Art Briles said Sunday. ‘‘That’s what I hate. We won a big game [Saturday] night. We are Big 12 champions. We won a Big 12 championship for two years in a row.’’

Bowlsby and his conference athletic directors are meeting in New York this week and he anticipates the topic of how best to determine a champion will come up.

‘‘This will be a catalyst for discussion for sure,’’ Bowlsby said.

The Big 12, along with the Atlantic Coast Conference, have proposed getting rid of NCAA rules requiring a conference have 12 teams split into two divisions to play a title game.

Holding one with 10 teams that play a nine-game round-robin schedule isn’t ideal because the game would always be a rematch, Bowlsby said.

‘‘I don’t know with 10 it’s something that we would necessarily do,’’ Bowlsby said. But conference expansion is a complicated issue that goes well beyond whether to hold a championship game.

Bowlsby cautioned about making a ‘‘knee-jerk’’ reaction to one year’s results. He said his faith in the process has not wavered.

‘‘We put a system in place and I helped to put it in place and I have confidence in that system. And I have confidence in the impeccable integrity of the people in that room,’’ he said.

Briles wasn’t so sure.

‘‘I think the committee needs to be a little more regionalized with people that are associated with the south part of the United States,’’ he said. ‘‘I'm not sure there is a connection on there that is that familiar with the Big 12 Conference.’’

There were five active athletic directors on the 12-member committee, one from each of the Big Five conferences. The Big 12 was represented by West Virginia’s Oliver Luck. The Mountaineers have been in the Big 12 for three seasons.

Maybe the most jarring part of Sunday’s unveiling was TCU dropping three spots from the previous rankings. The Horned Frogs seemed to be secure at No. 3 last week, and then beat lowly Iowa State by 52 on Saturday.

Committee chairman Jeff Long said TCU’s drop was more about the Buckeyes than the Frogs, but it highlighted a problem with weekly rankings. Commissioners initially leaned toward not having them when they first started putting the playoff together.

The top six teams in last week’s rankings all won on Saturday. On Sunday, the teams were the same, but the order was very different. And it left many fans wondering why.

Long said it was too soon to say what changes the committee would recommend to the commissioners. It’s safe to say the benefit of having weekly rankings will be addressed when Long’s crew reconvenes in a couple of months.

Ten bowls for Big Ten

Every bowl-eligible team in the Big Ten — 10 — will go to the postseason after all.

The conference was at risk of filling just nine spots if Michigan State had been picked for the Orange Bowl. But Mississippi State earned the nod over the Spartans by finishing a spot ahead of them in the final playoff rankings. That in turn opened up a spot for the Big Ten in the Citrus Bowl. Michigan State will now face Baylor in the Cotton Bowl, while Minnesota will play Missouri in the Citrus. The others are Illinois (Heart of Dallas), Rutgers (Quick Lane), Penn State (Pinstripe), Nebraska (Holiday), Maryland (Foster Farms), Iowa (TaxSlayer), Wisconsin (Outback), and Ohio State (Sugar).

Irish, LSU hook up

Notre Dame will try to end its late-season slide when it faces No. 22 LSU on Dec. 30 in the Music City Bowl. The Irish (7-5) looked like a College Football Playoff contender when they won their first six games. But Notre Dame closed the regular season on a four-game skid as injuries decimated its defense. LSU (8-4) has lost two of its last three games but closed the regular season with a 23-17 victory over Texas A&M . . . Days after its football program was shut down, the University of Alabama Birmingham got more bad news: There will be no postseason game. The Blazers finished 6-6 but weren’t among the five Conference USA teams receiving bids. On Sunday, UAB said football was expected to cost $49 million over the next five years . . . Clemson quarterback Deshaun Watson may have surgery to repair a torn knee ligament sooner than expected. Coach Dabo Swinney said the Tigers ‘star freshman played with a torn ACL in the 35-17 win over rival South Carolina on Nov. 29. The coach said then that Watson would be available for the bowl game. However, Swinney said Sunday he’d decide in the next day or two if Watson would undergo the operation before Clemson (9-3) faces Oklahoma (8-4) in the Russell Athletic Bowl on Dec. 29.
Bright lights for UNH

No. 1-ranked New Hampshire (11-1) will host Southern Conference champion Chattanooga (10-3) in the quarterfinals of the FCS playoffs Friday at 8, the first night home playoff game in program history. The top-seeded Wildcats rode a four-TD performance from Nico Steriti (110 yards rushing) to their 11th straight win Saturday afternoon, a 44-19 victory over Fordham in Durham. Chattanooga, the eighth seed, controlled the clock for 43 minutes in a 35-14 win over Indiana State.