Drew Stanton, Jaron Brown redeemed in Cardinals win

Several factors play into winning a game and losing a game, from the obvious to the not so obvious. During every Cardinals home game, azcentral sports NFL writer Bob McManaman breaks down the details and provides you with in-game analysis and insight. We call it "Turning Points."

The game-changing moment

Drew Stanton and Jaron Brown each punched their own redemption ticket on Sunday.

It ended up being worth a must-win 17-14 victory for the Cardinals over the Chiefs at University of Phoenix Stadium.

But first we need to turn back the pages and explain why. For Brown, you have to go back to the Seattle game in Week 12. He dropped a critical touchdown pass in the end zone during a time in the game when it could have helped set the stage for a Cardinals' upset win.

FINAL	1	2	3	4	SCORE
Kansas City	7	7	0	0	14
Arizona ¡ì	3	3	11	0	17
Preview | Matchup | Log | Wrap | Box
He was wide open on the play and didn't come down with the ball.

For Stanton, you just have to look at Arizona's first offensive series in the third quarter on Sunday. The Cardinals were trailing 14-6 and Chiefs coach Andy Reid was so unimpressed with Arizona's offense, he elected to go for it on fourth and three at the Cardinals' 39-yard line early in the quarter.

The Chiefs couldn't convert ? and neither could Stanton, who has looked spotty every since he threw those two first-quarter touchdown passes against Detroit back on Nov. 16. Other than a perfect, 45-yard strike to Michael Floyd, Stanton was erratic as ever on this particular series.

First, there was a pass thrown way behind a wide-open Larry Fitzgerald. Then there was another errant pass intended for Fitzgerald that should have been intercepted by linebacker Josh Mauga.

Then on second and 15 from the Chiefs' 21, Stanton sailed a pass high over the head of a wide-open Darren Fells near the end zone. On third and 15, he did the same thing to Fitzgerald and he's lucky that one wasn't intercepted, either.

The Cardinals had to settle for a Chandler Catanzaro field goal when a touchdown would have been a game changer. But that was coming soon enough and that's when Stanton and Brown earned their own redemption.

Following Alex Okafor's interception of an Alex Smith pass, Stanton and the Cardinals were facing a third and 18 at the Chiefs' 26-yard line with 3¨ö minutes remaining in the third. Brown took off for the end zone and Stanton rifled a shot with conviction straight into Brown's breadbasket.

Touchdown!

Instead of caving into the pressure and reeling in regret from his previous series, Stanton stepped up and made perfect throw at the perfect time. Instead of bobbling the ball or letting it bounce off his shoulder pads, Brown hauled in the pass and got into the end zone.

"Drew threw a great pass," said Brown, who only caught one other pass on the afternoon. "I was just trying to this one this time. I can't complain. I wanted to come in and help my team. It always feels good to get a touchdown, period. I had a short memory of that last one (in Seattle), but yeah, it definitely felt good to get in there."

As for Stanton's white-knuckle recovery one series after the botched one, every Cardinals player spoken to on offense said they had total belief in him.

"Drew's always very steady," tight end John Carlson said. "No matter what happens in the game, he doesn't falter or waver and I think it speaks to the confidence he has in himself. We certainly feel the same way about him."

Stanton acknowledged his bad throws in the series before the defining one could have crept into his head, but he wouldn't have any of it.

"It was one of those things," he said. "I'll go back and watch the tape, trying to see if my feet were out of whack or what it was or what I was thinking. You would like to have those throws back, especially that one to Larry on third down. I had a chance, if I put it on, then we might score.

"It's unfortunate, but ultimately we came away with the win."

The conversion

Now ahead 15-14 after Stanton and Brown connected, the obvious choice by Cardinals coach Bruce Arians was to go for the two-point conversion and make the Chiefs have to at least kick a field goal to tie.

The play was a designed quick screen release to Carlson, who caught the ball and wound up barely breaking the plane of the end zone for the critical two points.

If he doesn't get in, everything changes ? from momentum, to how the defense responds, to how the offense finds a way to kill some time off the clock.

"It felt really close," Carlson admitted.

But he knew exactly what he needed to do.

"The way that play is coached up is, the angle needs to get to the end zone because it's going to be one of those bang-bang, catch-and-hit plays," Carlson said. "So the coaching point on that play is to make sure you take an angle to the end zone. Apparently, it worked out because it was a two-point conversion."

Barely.

