Ohio State the correct choice for playoff

The charge was so simple, which is why the outcome was so controversial.
The task of the 12-person College Football Playoff selection committee was to pick the four best teams. Not the four teams with the most impressive results. Not the four most deserving teams. Not the four teams with the best won-lost records. Not one team from each of the four strongest conferences.
Just pick the four best teams, a seemingly simple, but entirely subjective, proposition open to interpretation.
Sunday¡¯s selection of Ohio State as the fourth team over Big 12 teams TCU and Baylor was the chief point of contention, leading to a flurry of questions:
?Does Ohio State belong in the four-team playoff, considering it plays in the weakest of the five power conferences and lost to a Virginia Tech team that was otherwise 5-6 overall and went 3-5 in the ACC, including a loss to a Wake Forest team that was winless in its other seven conference games?
The short answer is, yes.
The loss to Virginia Tech came in the second start by Ohio State redshirt freshman quarterback J.T. Barrett, who, by anyone¡¯s assessment, improved dramatically over the course of the season.
More significant is the Buckeyes¡¯ 59-0 victory Wisconsin in the Big Ten title game with a third-string quarterback, Cardale Jones, making his first career start. Granted, it¡¯s generally foolish to draw grand conclusions based on one game, but that¡¯s the only information on Jones the committee had at its disposal.
Jones went 12-for-17 for 257 yards and three touchdowns with no interceptions, slicing apart a Wisconsin team that ranked second in the nation in total defense and passing defense.
Jones¡¯ quarterback efficiency rating of 205.9 for the season would lead the nation if he had enough attempts to qualify. In fact, it would be an FBS record. Had this been the first game of the season, we might be calling Jones a Heisman Trophy candidate.
It is the Jones-led Buckeyes who will face Alabama in the national semifinals and those Buckeyes looked like one of the four best teams.
The one lingering question is the caliber of competition Ohio State faced. The Big Ten had only one notable nonconference win ? Indiana¡¯s victory over Missouri ? so you wonder how impressive a Big Ten title is.
Then again, Baylor certainly proved nothing by handling SMU (1-11), Buffalo (3-4 in the Mid-American Conference) and FCS team Northwestern State as its three nonconference games. TCU did not do much better by getting past SMU, FCS team Samford and Minnesota. The Horned Frogs¡¯ 30-7 home victory over the Gophers of the Big Ten raises some questions, because the Buckeyes beat Minnesota by only a 31-24 score at Minneapolis. But how many hairs are we going to split?
?Did the selection committee pick Ohio State simply to avoid the tougher choice of picking between Big 12 co-champions Baylor and TCU for the fourth slot?
Selection committee chair Jeff Long emphatically denied that was the case and strengthened that position by saying Ohio State was the ¡°decisive¡± and ¡°clear-cut¡± choice over Baylor and TCU.
Still, choosing Ohio State did avoid a larger dispute: The debate regarding TCU¡¯s better overall resume than Baylor¡¯s against Baylor¡¯s head-to-head win over TCU did not have to be addressed.
?Did the fact that the 10-team Big 12 was the only one of the five power conferences that did not have a championship game hurt Baylor and TCU?
It was not so much that it hurt Big 12 co-champions TCU and Baylor as much as it helped Ohio State, which was given the stage to make a grand final statement. Long said as much.
If the Big Ten had no title game, Ohio State would not be in the playoff. If Baylor and TCU had met in a Big 12 title game, the winner would have received a sizable boost, perhaps enough to finish ahead of Ohio State.
Presumably, the Big 12 will act to add a title game in the future. Although the NCAA requires conferences to have at least 12 teams to have a conference championship game, the Big 12 could request a waiver, which would be difficult for the NCAA to deny.
?How could TCU beat a team 55-3 and drop from No. 3 to No. 6 in the rankings?
That is very possible when the selection committee starts from scratch each week. Long had said last week that Nos. 3 through 6 (TCU, Florida State, Ohio State and Baylor) were very close. Florida State¡¯s victory over Georgia Tech, Baylor¡¯s win over Kansas State and Ohio State¡¯s victory over Wisconsin were all more impressive than TCU¡¯s victory over Iowa State (2-10).
Now if the Big 12 had had a conference championship game ...
?Will there be changes to the system in the near future?
Of course, there will be calls by disgruntled fans to expand the playoff to eight teams or use a different selection process. But the fact is, the contract for this four-team playoff goes through the 2025 season, and officials insist this will be the format for the next 11 years.
?Which will be the better semifinal game?
The matchup of Alabama¡¯s Nick Saban and Ohio State¡¯s Urban Meyer is intriguing, but having the 2013 Heisman Trophy winner (Florida State¡¯s Jameis Winston) face the likely 2014 Heisman winner (Oregon¡¯s Marcus Mariota) is a little juicier.
?Who was the big winner?
The Associated Press Top 25 voters, who had all four semifinalists in the top five of their preseason rankings. Ohio State was the lowest ranked at No. 5, and it was the last team to make the playoff field.
Jake Curtis is a freelance writer.
Riddle
When is a record not a record?
If Wisconsin¡¯s Melvin Gordon rushes for 293 yards in the Badgers¡¯ bowl game, he would hold the official NCAA FBS record for rushing yards in a single season, even though it would not be the most rushing yards gained by an FBS player in a season.
Huh?
You see, Oklahoma State¡¯s Barry Sanders ran for 2,628 yards during his 11 regular-season games in 1988, and that stands as the official NCAA record. The NCAA did not include bowl-game statistics in single-season totals until 2002, so the 222 yards Sanders added in the Cowboys¡¯ 62-14 victory over Wyoming in the 1988 Holiday Bowl did not count in his single-season total, officially leaving him with 2,628 yards instead of 2,850. But the yards Gordon gains in a bowl game will count, so anything he adds to his current total of 2,336 will be included in his official single-season total. If that total surpasses 2,628, Gordon will be listed as the single-season record-holder by the NCAA, as confirmed by David Worlock, NCAA director of media coordination and statistics, marketing and broadcast alliances.
It would seem a simple chore to add Sanders¡¯ bowl-game statistics retroactively, but the NCAA has chosen not to do that, creating a rather odd record chase for Gordon ? one he already has lost yet has a chance to win.
The Santa Clara Ducks
Oregon has scored more points at Levi¡¯s Stadium this season than the 49ers.
The Ducks scored 110 points in their two games on the 49ers¡¯ home field in wins over Cal and Arizona. The 49ers have scored 98 points in their six regular-season games at the Santa Clara venue.
