Despite Win, Patriots Offense Must Play Better to Meet Playoff Expectations

For nearly two months from early October to late November, the New England Patriots' offense methodically and meticulously picked apart their opponents. They scored 34 points or more in six of seven games, and averaged 39.6 points per game in that time. 

Typically, the Patriots find their rhythm late in the season and play their best football in the months of November and December. This year, however, the offense is hitting a lull as we hit the home stretch to the playoffs. 

A big play in the fourth quarter, coupled with some magnificent work by the defense, was enough to lift the Patriots to a 23-14 victory over the San Diego Chargers on Sunday Night Football. They were down 14-3 at one point, but trailed by only one point at halftime?a miracle when you consider the two first-half turnovers (a fumble by wide receiver Brandon LaFell and an interception by quarterback Tom Brady) and the team's continued struggles in the red zone (1-for-4).

New England Patriots offense
Weeks	5-12 (7 games)	13-14
Points/game	39.6	22
Yards/game	423	358.5
3rd down conversions	49/97 (50.5%)	11/26 (42.3%)
Red zone scoring %	24/34 (70.6%)	4/7 (57.1%)
Source: Pro-Football-Reference.com

It helps when you have a future Hall of Fame quarterback throwing the ball, an elite talent and freakish athlete at tight end, and a pair of wide receivers who are good complements to both the quarterback and the tight end. 

The offensive line, however, will have to play better in order for the team to reach their lofty playoff aspirations. Once again, Brady was under fire far too often. He was sacked once, hit at least three times, and was even a victim of a sack-fumble that was recovered by New England.

The struggles up front kept the Patriots from moving the ball down the field. They went three-and-out on three straight drives to start the second half, and punter Ryan Allen had five punts, tied for the second-most he's had in a game all season.

It wasn't just the passing game that struggled as a result of the poor blocks, which at times more closely resembled a revolving door or a turnstile than a blocking unit. The Patriots only picked up 87 rushing yards, with only 3.1 yards per carry against a defense that ranked in the bottom five across the board against the run.

One promising sign: when the offensive line was playing well, the offense found ways to put points on the board. LeGarrette Blount had some hard runs where he built momentum, lowered his shoulder and drove through would-be tacklers like Steve McQueen driving through the streets of San Francisco.

The Patriots had only two touchdown drives. Gronkowski's first-half touchdown catch kept the Patriots in the game.


Edelman's second-half touchdown helped them put it away.

Gronkowski got to show us why he is considered such a dominant player at his position. Brady threw a back-shoulder pass to Gronkowski, who was running down the left sideline. The 6'6", 260-pound monster turned to his right?against the forward momentum of his body?to catch the pass over the head of Chargers cornerback Brandon Flowers. 

Edelman, on the other hand, got to show us how his skills as a punt returner can translate to the wide receiver position, and vice versa, on a 69-yard catch-and-run. 

"Great play," Brady said after the game. "It was a good opportunity for us to throw it. They were pretty heavy in the run, and I found a little spot to throw it. Jules made a great catch. We needed that type of play at that point in the game, and the defense took over from there."

