Neubauer: Kentucky best defensive team in era of modern college basketall

LEXINGTON ? Jeff Neubauer thought Kentucky was a good defensive basketball team before Eastern Kentucky played the No. 1 Wildcats Sunday.
But after watching UK beat his team 82-49 and hold the Colonels to just 14 points in the first half, Neubauer was even more impressed. His team shot just 21.6 percent ? even below the 28 percent UK?had been limiting opponents to this year. It was the sixth time in nine games a Kentucky opponent failed to shoot 30 percent from the field.
¡°Really pleased with forcing 17 turnovers. Our full court pressure did make a difference. It did affect them at certain times. I didn¡¯t think our transition defense was very good, but the feeling that our guys have in the locker room right now after shooting 26 percent, being held to 49 points is a feeling that¡¯s not good,¡± the Eastern Kentucky coach said. ¡°That¡¯s not something that we¡¯re accustomed to, or ranked teams in the country are accustomed to. However, that is what Kentucky has done to every opponent that they have played so far.
¡°We knew coming into this game, as a coaching staff, that they were holding opponents to 28 percent from the field, and that¡¯s absolutely amazing. Our team, I told them they were just guarded by the best defensive team in the modern era of college basketball, and I¡¯m not exaggerating a little bit when I say that.¡±
Neubauer actually thought the smaller Colonels would attack UK?better than they did.
¡°I knew how good they were defensively, but I thought we could take advantage of their taller players off of the dribble more. We weren¡¯t able to beat them cleanly enough off the dribble, so we did go by some guys but not enough to create enough help. We need to be a better shooting team, but a lot of what happened tonight was because of Kentucky¡¯s defense,¡± the Eastern coach said.
Guard Denzel Richardson was the one player not impacted by UK¡¯s defense. He was 8-for-11 from the field, including 3-for-3 on 3-pointers, and had 19 points. He hit back-to-back 3¡¯s in the first half to force a Kentucky timeout. His teammates were 3-for-27 from 3-point range and 8-for-58 from the field.
¡°It was really not that good of defenders to me,¡± Richardson said.
Not that good?
¡°Not on me, but I?give credit to UK," Richardson said.
Neubauer laughed when told what Richardson said about UK¡¯s defenders.
¡°We do need to do more media training with our young men,¡± Neubauer said. ¡°Denzel¡¯s a young man that has only been in our program for a few months, and I certainly would like to give the Kentucky defenders credit because even their taller players, guys that in most programs would be defending five men, they¡¯re out there in the program guarding three men and doing a pretty good job. I was impressed.¡±
So was Eastern forward Timmy Knipp, who was just 2-for-12 from the field. He did have six rebounds, two steals and one block. He had a bit more respect for UK¡¯s defense.
"They are a really good team. I was trying to attack and find teammates on the perimeter. We were not hitting tonight and just have to give credit to UK,¡± said Knipp, who took a hard fall after being fouled by Marcus Lee in the second half.
Kentucky associate coach John Robic liked what UK?did defensively as well.
¡°We have defended well all year long and we expect that. Some of the numbers that we're producing right now are kind of silly. I mean, it's mind-boggling,¡± Robic said. ¡°Our guys are taking pride in defense right now and really buying into it. They recognize the hard work that they're putting in defensively, and we challenge them to do that.
¡°And this was a tough game for us just because of the size differential. You have problems when you have seven-footers guarding six-two on the perimeter. And I thought we did that very, very well today.¡±
Opponents have scored 26 or fewer points in 11 of 17 halves against Kentucky.
¡°We are just really happy with where our defense is right now because that will win a lot of games for you,¡± Robic said.
Neubauer was impressed that Kentucky got only 10 offensive rebounds.
¡°They missed 29 shots and only had 10 offensive rebounds,¡±?Neubauer said. ¡°For our team, that is incredibly good.¡±