Taylor Swift Stuns With 2 Glittering Looks at 2014 Jingle Ball—See Photos of Her and Other Celebs

Taylor Swift  rocked two stunning, sparkling looks at the 2014 Jingle Ball on Friday in Los Angeles.
The Grammy winner and newly-nominated "Shake It Off" pop star, who has also been killing it fashion-wise this year, sported what appeared to be a strapless dress made up of a black bodice and a glittering, golden A-line skirt that landed just over her knees, paired with black strappy pumps, as she arrived at the annual event at Staples Center.
She later took to the stage in a black crop top covered by a black, sparkling, long-sleeve cropped jacket, paired with matching skater skirt, and performed her latest hit single, "Blank Space," as well as her 2012 hits "We Are Never Getting Back Together" and "I Knew You Were Trouble."
NEWS: Taylor Swift adds fuel to Matt Healy romance rumors after attending another one of The 1975's concerts
Swift also sang two more songs. And, like a trooper, she performed despite suffering from a "wicked case of laryngitis."

Swift is currently topping the Billboard Hot 200 Albums Chart with her new all-pop record 1989, which contains the track "Blanks Space" and was recently nominated for three Grammy Awards for another one of its hit singles, "Shake It Off." The singer, who made the transition from country to pop music this year, has won seven Grammys since she began her music career.
She was also named Billboard's Artist of the Year for 2014, marking her second such honor.

Ariana Grande also performed and sported a glittering look herself—a playful, red bustier and matching, super-short skater skirt. She sang "Bang Bang" with Jessie J and her new, sultry Christmas song, "Santa Tell Me." She and beau and hip hop star Big Sean also performed their duet "Best Mistake," which Grande said was one of her favorite songs.
The two appeared to have a lot of chemistry and got a little grabby onstage. He then tried to kiss her at the end of their performance and she appeared to turn the other way.
Other performers included Jessie J, Gwen Stefani and fellow The Voice coach Pharrell Williams, Sam Smith, Becky G, Rixton, Kiesza, "All About That Bass" singer Meghan Trainor, Shawn Mendes, 5 Seconds of Summer, "Fancy" rapper Iggy Azalea, Rita Ora, Charli XCX, Nick Jonas and Demi Lovato—who performed their new duet "Avalanche." The two hugged at the end of their song.
The annual concert is sponsored by KIIS-FM and other Jingle Ball shows are held in other major cities as well.