Homeland recap: '13 Hours in Islamabad'

Where Homeland's third season memorably, gratefully ended with a gasp and a whimper—when Carrie Mathison watching helplessly as her beloved Brody reached the end of a rope that had been around his neck since 2010—then this season seems determined to go out in completely the opposite way: With a series of great, big, unpredictable bangs, designed to excite and titillate even its most jaded viewers.
When we last saw Carrie and Saul Berenson, they were in a convoy back to the embassy that had just been blown up by rocket launchers, leading to questions about whether Homeland had just made the extraordinary choice to kill off its two most central characters. Gutsy as that would have been, it turns out that Carrie and Saul are still alive. Not so lucky, however, is John Redmond, who took a glass shard to the neck, making him the first of this episode's many casualties. (If you're planning on pouring one out for everyone who died this week, consider yourself warned: You're going to need a bigger bottle.)
With Dennis Boyd, traitor mole, having finally come clean about the terrorist moles currently burrowing their way into the embassy, Ambassador Martha Boyd alerts Quinn in the hopes of recalling some of their Marines. But the Marines are going to have some trouble getting back, as hidden snipers started taking them out the moment they arrived to rescue the convoy. With bullets flying through the air and soldiers dropping like flies, Carrie puts in a frantic phone call to Asar Khan.
But when Khan makes to call for support, Tasneem brazenly suggests that he should wait 10 minutes to call—10 minutes during which the Americans will be taught a lesson that'll send them fleeing from Pakistan with their tails between their legs. Khan looks aghast, but he's apparently not aghast enough to a) send immediate help to the people being murdered by terrorists on the streets of his city, or b) punch Tasneem the Terrorist Sympathizer right in her smug mouth. A shame; he seemed so cool last week.
GET MORE EW: Subscribe to the magazine for only 33¢ an issue!
Meanwhile, at the embassy, the CIA is doing what the CIA does when bad guys are about to break down their doors: shredding, burning, and otherwise destroying all documents that could compromise them. But of course, there's a MacGuffin: A big, fancy list of all their assets, including ones in tribal areas, that's basically irreplaceable. Lockhart is holding that list at the moment when Haqqani's men breach the ops room, and it is not a polite entrance. Lockhart flees toward the embassy's vault amid a hail of machine gun fire. He's the only one to escape. Everyone else in the room is either killed (goodbye, Hensley) or taken hostage (hello, Max and Fara.)

Needless to say, Haqqani has breached the embassy specifically in search of this asset list. After interrogating his hostages as to its location (and interrogating brave, frightened Fara about her role as a Muslim in the CIA), he leads them out and lines them up in a hallway outside the vault, where everyone inside—including Lockhart and both the Boyds—can see them via remote camera. And needless to say, he does this specifically to set up an agonizing scene wherein he shoots the hostages one by one until someone gives him what he wants. He kills three men before he reaches someone that we (and Lockhart) care about: Fara.
Haqqani threatens to cut Fara's throat, and it's more than Lockhart can stand. He hurls Martha Boyd bodily to the floor in his haste to get out the door with the asset list, which—tension on top of tension!—turns out to be on a countdown timer, which means another 48 agonizing seconds in which Haqqani might get impatient with that knife. Fortunately, the door opens without further incident.
Unfortunately, this just means that all the terrible stuff happens after the door opens. With his primary mission accomplished, Haqqani embarks on his secondary one: To take out as many Americans as possible. "Kill them all," he says, as he drives the knife into Fara's side.
This is when Quinn and the one remaining soldier still left in the embassy, who have already murdered a solid dozen of Haqqani's men down in the basement, come around the corner shooting. Most of the bullets hit terrorists, including Haqqani, who grabs the asset list and flees with the luckiest two of his men. The rest of them go down one by one, until it's down to Quinn and the soldier at one end of the hallway and a terrorist using a hostage as a human shield at the other end. And yes, I am describing this scene in very explicit detail, but only because what happens next is so incredibly terrific: Max, who had been all but forgotten in the melee, grabs a gun from a dead man's hand and shoots the last remaining bad guy.
GET EW ON YOUR TABLET: Subscribe today and get instant access!
If you need something happy to focus on for the remaining 40 minutes of this episode, focus on that.
When Saul and Carrie finally arrive back at the embassy, they find Haqqani's terrorist flag strung up on the outside and carnage on the inside. The total death toll is 36, and yes, it includes Fara—which is such a shame, and really made me wish she'd had more screen time this season. So does Max, who eulogizes his colleague by way of telling Carrie, "You were mean. All she wanted was your approval, and all you gave her was a hard time."
"You could've said something nice, just once," he says. "It would have meant so much."
"I wish I had," says Carrie.
And Max says, "Just a few words, is all, because she was really doing okay."
RIP, Fara. You were really doing okay.