Hot Hollywood: Reese Witherspoons wild side, Kendra Wilkinsons Playboy revelations

Reese Wild Side

America will have to find a new sweetheart. "People are like, 'We don't want Reese to say profanity. We don't want her to have sex. We don't want her to take drugs,'" says Reese Witherspoon. But in Wild (out December 5), the Southern star swears, sleeps with strangers and even shoots heroin. After more than a decade typecast as a smart, sunny go-getter, the Oscar winner, 38, says she was ready to be liberated from her "tiny little box." The emancipation started unexpec­tedly with an April 2013 arrest for disorderly conduct after what she admitted was "one too many drinks." While her slurred "Do you know my name?" cop showdown led to a swift public apology, "it was a moment," she muses, "when people realized that I wasn't exactly what they thought I was."

True colors Her polished persona is still being chipped away: The mom of Ava, 15, Deacon, 11, and Tennessee, 2, was spotted dancing with abandon at an August wedding and partying with Don't Mess With Texas costar Sofia Vergara in New Orleans. Now the Wild and Gone Girl producer, wed to Jim Toth, 44, is excited by the meaty projects on her plate, including an adaptation of the murderous-moms novel Big Little Lies, opposite Nicole ­Kidman. "For a couple of years . . . I think I was a little lost," Witherspoon says. "It's nice to feel back on track."

Kendra Wilkinson

Her Playboy Revelations

She wasn't just there for the conversation. On the November 24 episode of U.K. reality show I'm a ­Celebrity, Get Me Out of Here!, Kendra Wilkinson admitted she "didn't know sex was involved" when Hugh Hefner, then 78, asked her to be one of his live-in girlfriends in 2004. "I knew nothing about Playboy. I'd just graduated high school," recalled Wilkinson, then 18. "I was living in this small-ass apartment ... and I was praying for anything to get me out of there." Weeks after the San Diego native moved into the Playboy Mansion in L.A.'s Holmby Hills, how­ever, Hefner made his romantic intentions clear. "He's like, 'Do you wanna come upstairs?'" Wilkinson, 29, ­explained of her first sexual encounter with the media mogul, now 88. "I (said), 'Sure, let's have fun.'" And the reality star - who went on to marry Hank Baskett, 32, at the mansion in 2009 - didn't balk as the tension, er, mounted. "I wasn't thinking about how much older Hef was," the mom of Hank IV, 5, and 7-month-old Alijah wrote in her 2010 memoir. "All the body parts worked the same."

No Underwear? No Problem!

These stars dare to bare their commando confessions

Christina Aguilera

"I like to be as free as possible at all times," the singer, 33, said in 2012. "It's empowering. It's p-sy power!"

Scott Disick & Kris Jenner

When Disick, 31, stated his love for going au naturel in 2013, Jenner, 59, chimed in, "That makes two of us!"

Johnny Depp

Skipping skivvies is "the general approach," the actor, 51, explained in 2013. "No undergarments involved!"

Kim Cattrall

"If you don't wear underwear, that's more ventilation," argued the Sex and the City alum, 56. "(It's) healthier."

What's In My Bag?

Ready for its close-up!

Alessandra Ambrosio, 33, spills her tote for Us

It's always crunch time for the supermodel. "I like to have Lay's Salt & Vinegar chips and a Toblerone bar in my Gucci tote," says the Victoria's Secret Angel (the brand's annual fashion show airs on CBS December 9 at 10 p.m.). "I'm obsessed! And I share them with my kids." The mom of Anja, 6, and Noah, 2 (with ­fiancé ­Jamie Mazur, 37), feeds Us more.

Facing Fear

"I carry my white iPad mini and Beats headphones to watch TV shows. I downloaded American Horror Story, but I'm scared to watch! I've only seen half an episode, and I don't have the courage to finish."

Cowabunga Boo-boos!

"My kids don't like boring Band-Aids. So I buy Strawberry Shortcake and Ninja Turtle ones. I use them too!"

Déjà Brew

"I drink Two Leaves and a Bud chamomile tea when I wake up, during the day and before I go to sleep. When I travel, I make sure they're with me."

Tricks of the Trade

"There's so much in my ­Longchamp makeup bag! I have shimmer lip balm by Rodin, nipple pasties and RMS Beauty's Lip2Cheek, which you can use as a blush or red lipstick."

Snap Happy

"I bring my Fujifilm Instax camera with me everywhere. I love taking shots of my kids. And the photos print out right away!"

Oh, Behave! Stars' Parental Tricks

Cruel and unusual punishments? Celebs get creative to keep their kids in line

Jamie Oliver

When daughter Poppy, 12, acted "rude," the chef, 39, slyly rubbed her apple snack with a hot pepper.

Victoria Beckham

The mom of four, 40, says she uses a "punishment chair" when one of her brood "has done something naughty."

Tony Hawk

A 2012 squabble over ­video games prompted the skateboarder, 46, to duct-tape one of his children to the wall.

Jessica Alba

Time-out! The actress, 33, puts her cranky tots, Honor, 6, and Haven, 3, in a corner with their noses to the wall.

Will Smith

The actor, 46, and wife Jada, 43, let their kids decide their fate. One penance set by Willow, 14: no internet for a month.