Iggy Azalea Talks Grammys: ''If I Lose Every Award to Sam Smith, I'm Okay With It''

It would be an understatement to say that it's been a great year for Iggy Azalea. 
Not only has the 24-year-old star successfully become the first female white rapper, but her hit single "Fancy" also spent seven weeks at No. 1 on the Billboard Hot 100. She's also had chart-topping hits with powerful female musicians, such as "Problem" (featuring Ariana Grande) as well as "Black Widow" (Rita Ora's feminist anthem)—oh, and she was also nominated for a Grammy for Best New Artist as well as Record of the Year this morning. 
"It has been a pretty awesome year," Azalea, who is among Billboard's Women in Music honorees, tells the publication. 
Despite her achievements, Iggy has also faced a fair amount of scrutiny as she tries to make it in a male-dominated music genre (remember that feud with Snoop Dogg?!), but, despite her critics, the rapper has successfully made a name for herself in the biz. 

"I don't know one girl my age who isn't a fan of rap music," she says. "We have very few characters that we can identify with, so it's cool I get to be one of those girls."
Iggy has a wide range of artists whom she credits as inspiration, including fellow female rappers as well as powerhouse vocalists. 
"I've always loved Fergie and Gwen Stefani," she shares. "I loved Eve and Lil' Kim and Missy Elliott. I loved Trina and Christina Aguilera as well. I wanted to be a mix of all of them, which I think I am—I hope!"
Another newcomer in the biz whom she adores? 

Sam Smith, who was nominated for five Grammys this morning, and will go head to head with Iggy for the award for Best New Artist as well as Record of the Year. 
"I really loved Sam Smith's record," she says. "The Grammys are coming up, and if I lose every award to Sam Smith, I'd be fine with it."
Azalea also touched on her new life in the public eye, admitting it's difficult to be followed for your every move. 

"Everything gets so scrutinized now. We have so many outlets that it's hard sometimes to just be normal," she explains. "Right now I'm getting [my A$AP Rocky] tattoo removed and I know there's seven paparazzi outside taking pictures of me having a conversation with you and I would prefer to do that in private. But someone's going to sell these pictures to a blog so we can talk about it on Twitter."
As for Azalea's earliest musical memory? 
"I played the violin for a bit, but now I can't really play an instrument," she admits. "I can rap. I first rapped probably when I was 13. People who say they rapped when they were 6 are just lying. To be good, you have to know words."
Congrats on your accolades, Iggy! 