WGBH hosts ‘Downton Abbey’ screening

It was hard to tell the hired actors from the guests at Sunday’s afternoon tea celebrating the upcoming fifth season of “Downton Abbey.”

Flapper gowns, beaded headpieces, and tailcoats were in fashion among those who gathered at WGBH to get a first glimpse of the first episode, which airs to the rest of the country on PBS Jan. 4. The crowd of about 200 guests (200 more would come to a second screening later that day) included four generations of Mary Reed’s family. The Quincy matriarch brought her daughter Anita Handy, granddaughter Nida Wright, and great-granddaughter Lily Lewis, all of Boston, in their Sunday finery.

“I just love the outfits and the manners,” said Reed, who nibbled tea sandwiches and scones with clotted cream after the screening. “To see the way they put on the gloves — no one does that anymore.”

Sipping tea punch and champagne were Lynn Bay Dayton, Kim Jacobs, Cynthia Strauss, and Jeffrey Dover. On hand for a post-screening discussion of the hit period drama were “Downton” actress Laura Carmichael, who plays Lady Edith, historical adviser Alastair Bruce, and “Masterpiece” executive producer Rebecca Eaton.

“It’s so crazy,” said Carmichael, 28, whose part on “Downton” was the first TV role in her career. “I thought it would be three lines. I thought I’d be playing a maid.”

Speaking at a pre-screening reception for VIP donors, Carmichael, whose blond tresses look nothing like the strawberry blond curls she wears on the period drama, said she is rarely recognized in public unless she is with a commanding costar.

“I attended a charity event with Jim Carter who plays Carson [the butler]. He has a booming voice. He can’t go anywhere,” she said.

The new episode got lots of laughs (spoiler alert: the butler Molesley experiments with a new grooming habit), and Bruce, whom the cast calls “the Oracle,” regaled the audience with historical facts and behind-the-scenes anecdotes.

“Back then they would change outfits no less than seven times [a day],” he said, ticking off the occasions: for breakfast, to go riding, for lunch, for a walk, for tea, for dinner, for bed.

Bruce, who as a herald to the queen advises on pomp and ceremony, added that his expertise on all things manners-related and historical came through years of study. And, he added: “I had a terrifying nanny.”