Dean Cain Speaks Candidly About Having Sex With "America's Virgin" Brooke Shields

Have you heard Brooke Shields' confession yet? She lost her virginity when she was 22 to the one and only Superman aka Dean Cain!
It's a personal story you'll read all about in her new memoir There Was a Little Girl: The Real Story of My Mother and Me. But before you expect plenty of friction and animosity between the former couple today, it turns out the pair still has deep love and respect for each other.
"We are still great friends…I was in love with her certainly, we were in college, sweethearts," Cain shared on Monday's all-new Meredith Vieira Show. "There was nothing I did to her that I'm ashamed of in any shape or form. So I said [to her] write away and hopefully it will be cathartic for her and she can sort of deal with that huge portion of her life."
Huge portion may be putting it lightly. 

Raised by a deeply religious Catholic mother, Shields wrote in her book that her mom was "unjustly judgmental" of her relationship with Cain. It also didn't help that most of America knew about her vow of chastity.
"It was a big thing in her life," Cain shared with Meredith Vieira. "America's virgin, it's a big deal and she felt the weight of the world and everybody watching her and that was, I think placed from her mother, and I think was one of the things that was very tough for her."
All the fear and anxiety resulted in Shields becoming guilt slapped in an instant shortly after making love to Cain. As a result, she ran out of his room "buck naked" in sheer panic.
What did Cain do? Act like a true gentleman. 

"It was just to go with her and be with her and chill her out because it wasn't such a big deal," he said when recalling the event. "It wasn't like it was some awful giant thing but she saw it that way, but I was just there to be there and calm her down and that worked."
Even though the two have moved on, Cain admits that the relationship was something very special and one that will hopefully continue as a friendship for years to come.
"We truly had a wonderful relationship, we were two young people and we cared for each other," he explained. "She is a wonderful person, girl, woman and mother everything now and wife, just going to put that out there."