Wreck: Escape Without Injury, Despite Death Rumors

Megan Fox and Brian Austin Green are doing well after being involved in a wreck caused by a drunk driver. Despite a number of fake death reports, the couple miraculously escaped the crash without injury.
Like Us on Facebook 
On Thursday night in Los Angeles, Brian Austin Green and Megan Fox could have been killed.
The couple were headed home for the evening, when a drunk driver plowed into their vehicle. Though the wreck occurred on Thursday, neither Brian nor Megan reached out to the press for over 24 hours.
That's when a very lucky Green spoke to People, one of the world's leading publications in entertainment news.
According to Green, both he and Megan are doing just fine, though he really can't be certain:
"I'm okay. My wife is okay. We walked away...I mean, I'm not a doctor, so I don't know if I'm 'okay' okay, but we're both walking...Your head is reliving the moment over and over again, and you start thinking, 'Could I have done anything differently?'"
Luckily for Brian, he didn't have to.
One thing he might have done, however, is issued a statement to the press sooner. After media outlets covered the wreck, Twitter and Facebook were abuzz with death hoaxes.
Of course, this isn't the first time that Megan has been falsely accused of dying.
Back in January of last year, a popular entertainment website mistakenly reported that Fox was killed in a car crash. And, according to Glamour, the pranksters were successful in tricking people into believing Megan was deceased:
"Megan Fox was the victim of a hoax [in January, 2013] after Gossip Cop falsely reported that she was dead, following a report made by Global Associated News...The site said that the actress had been killed in a single vehicle crash and, as the story was circulated, 'RIP Megan Fox' became one of the top trending topics on Twitter."
What do you think about the latest reports? Were you relieved to find out Megan and Brian were safe from harm?
We want to hear from you. Tell us your thoughts in the comment field below.