As her due date nears, Kourtney Kardashian fumes over Scott Disick's careless ways

So much was riding on their November 8 getaway to Santa Barbara. Kourtney Kardashian and Scott Disick had booked a room at a Four Seasons resort - where suites cost up to $6,000 a night - telling friends they were taking a babymoon before welcoming their third child in December. Free from the distractions of son Mason, 5, and daughter Penelope, 2, the couple ­admired sweeping views of the Pacific Ocean and the Santa Ynez Mountains as they ate chocolate-covered strawberries and curled up by the roaring fire. But the purpose of the weekend wasn't just romance. "The trip was a 'fixer-upper,'" says a family source. "Another one. They needed some time to focus on them."

But one weekend, and hours of couples therapy, hasn't salvaged what's broken. Eight years of ultimatums and temporary splits have left the pair's relationship "very strained," says the source. This summer did not help matters: While dealing with the endless nausea of her pregnancy, the mom, 35, watched as Disick's drinking became so out of control that he was hospitalized for alcohol poisoning after taking sleeping pills. Now Kourtney is considering a plan to permanently leave Disick, 31, says the family source, for the sake of their kids. "If Scott can't get his act together," shares the source, "she's ending things after the baby comes."

Downward Spiral

Kourtney told Us in October that the entire season of Kourtney & Khloé Take the Hamptons (airing now) would be "very emotional and dark." It certainly was on November 30's episode when, after a mere five days, Disick ditched the rehab his partner demanded he enter. "It's stressful … how much we've fought over all these years," Disick told his girlfriend - in front of the cameras, of course - when he returned home from Connecticut's Mountainside treatment center. "I'm at the point where I'm just so f-king tired of everything. I don't want to lose you or my kids, but, like, are we going to spend the rest of our lives (fighting)?" When Kourtney suggested they take some time apart, he retorted that they had not spent the night in the same bed since she began cosleeping with Mason. "How much more space do you need?" he fired back. "We haven't slept together in five years!"

But as much as Disick has become a surprising voice of reason in the Kardashian franchise, his halfhearted efforts at sobriety were just that. Though he admitted in the episode (taped in June) that drinking and taking pills, including Ativan, had become "like a 24-hour job … to not think" since losing his parents, Bonnie and Jeffrey, within three months of each other a year ago, "Scott checking into rehab was all for TV," says the source. "E! wanted him to appear more likable." His role is more important to the family business than ever, adds the source: "Scott is the drama this entire season. Kourtney is aware of that."

Off screen, Disick sipped iced coffee at an August pool-party hosting gig at Connecticut's Foxwoods casino. But come October, he had moved on to nursing one drink at 1 Oak in Las Vegas. And by the time he returned to the same club for Kris Jenner's November 7 birthday bash, he was back to his old raging self. Without his girlfriend there to chaperone, he even doused his would-be mother-in-law with a bottle of champagne. "Scott was other­level drunk," says a guest. "Whatever alcohol he wasn't spraying on the crowd, he was drinking - vodka and champagne, all night."

With every sip, Disick is breaking a vow he made off camera to Kourtney in June: No drinking until the baby is born. "Kourtney told him he was on his last chance," says the source. "She sees where it's going, and it's been heading in this direction a long time."

Back and Forth

Signs of trouble existed as far back as 2009, when a shocked Kourtney learned she was pregnant with then-ex-boyfriend Disick's child. Since then, she has candidly admitted that she considered terminating the pregnancy rather than raise a child with him. But the pair reconciled shortly after she told him the news, and the then-26-year-old urged her to keep the ­baby. Even so, their relationship leading up to Mason's birth was hardly smooth. She split with Disick again in her last trimester after he drunkenly shoved a $100 bill into a waiter's mouth at Kim's birthday party. (Staff had been instructed not to serve Lord Disick any more liquor.) Months later, while Mason was an infant, E! cameras captured a vicious fight with Kourtney in Miami, culminating in Disick's slamming his fist into a mirror as Aunt Kim fled their home with the baby.

Family Matters

Despite Disick's bouts of erratic behavior, the couple have done a remarkable job of shielding their kids from the drama, says the source. "Scott is not a good boyfriend - that's why she will never marry him," notes the insider. "But he is a great father. Those kids just love him."

Kourtney is weighing whether that love is enough to make up for Dad's partying. "Mason is getting older now. Pretty soon the questions will come: 'Why didn't Daddy sleep at home last night?' and 'Why is Daddy puking in the bathroom?' Kourtney won't handle that well," says the source, musing, "And if it's like this now, what does it look like in five years?"

If she does pull the trigger, says the family source, it will only happen once she's ready to be a single parent: "It won't be immediately after the third baby, since Scott does help a lot with the kids. But I can't imagine her doing this another year." She's done enough already.

 

Where Was Kanye?

No trouble in paradise here! In Paris November 27, West, 37, settled for dinner with friends at Ralph's, the upscale Ralph Lauren eatery. "Kim and Kanye are closer than ever," says a family source. "They're doing great."

 

Kylie: Lips Serviced?

Kylie Jenner, 17, can't get enough of her pumped-up pout. "She thinks overdrawn lips look amazing," says a source. "She's going for an L.A. goth-doll vibe." Despite speculation that she's been surgically enhanced, sis Kim insists the teen "only wears a lip liner." Even so, "her family thinks this much plump is overkill," says a pal. "Her mom said she has to stop."

