Krysten Ritter Is Jessica Jones in the Latest Marvel TV Show

Krysten Ritter is your latest superhero. Marvel has confirmed the Breaking Bad and Don't Trust the B— veteran will play the title role in the new Netflix series Marvel's AKA Jessica Jones. The TV series is based on the Marvel Comics character that rose to prominence in Brian Michael Bendis' Alias series.
Marvel's Jessica Jones is just one of the many comic book shows coming to Netflix as part of a deal the streaming service sealed with Marvel. There's also Daredevil, Iron Fist, Luke Cage and a Defenders series featuring all the individual characters. Deadline reports The Good Wife and Ringer veteran Mike Colter will play Luke Cage—in the comics Luke Cage and Jessica Jones are involved romantically—and Boardwalk Empire's Charlie Cox has already been tapped to play Daredevil.
"Krysten brings both the hard edge and the vulnerability the role demands," Executive Producer and showrunner Melissa Rosenberg said in a statement. "We can't wait for fans to see her in action, coming to Netflix in 2015."
CLICK: What happened to Krysten Ritter's NBC sitcom
In the comic series, Jessica Jones is a retired superhero who attempts to give up the life of powers (she can fly, has a certain level of invulnerability and possess super strength) and spandex and works as a private eye. Prior to giving up her life as a costumed crime-fighter, Jessica Jones was held prisoner and abused by the Purple Man.
The Marvel Netflix shows are all set in the same universe as the movies and other shows that live on ABC. Marvel's Daredevil is set to debut in 2015 and also stars Vincent D'Onofrio, Rosario Dawson and Deborah Ann Woll. Jessica Jones is also expected to debut next year.
Ritter was previously attached to star in NBC's Mission Control, a midseason comedy, but the show was canceled before it premiered. She recently popped up on The Blacklist and other TV credits include Veronica Mars, One Life to Live and Gilmore Girls.
MORE: See Charlie Cox in Daredevil
Marvel's AKA Jessica Jones is just one of many new superhero shows in the works. In addition to the already existing Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D., Agent Carter, Gotham, The Flash, Arrow and Constantine, new shows about Supergirl, Teen Titans, Archie Comics and Preacher are also in the works.
"Krysten Ritter has the type of range, spanning the comic to the tragic, that makes for the stuff of the best Marvel heroes," Jeph Loeb, executive producer and Marvel's head of television, said in a statement. "As Jessica Jones, Krysten will bring one of the most beloved new characters of the past decade to life in a way we know will delight her longtime fans and introduce her to many more."
Marvel's AKA Jessica Jones will premiere in 2015.