IARPA Begins Research in Developing Supercomputers under C3 Program 

Under the project name Cryogenic Computer Complexity (C3), Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity (IARPA), a United States spy research agency, has started the research in building supercomputers.

Under this program to build superconducting exascale computer, the IARPA will work with three big technology companies. It has awarded first contracts to IBM, Northrop Grumman and Raytheon BBN Technologies to start the process.

The C3 program is a multi-year research program, which will result into an exascale supercomputer having the ability of 1,000 petaflops or at least 40 times faster than the current world's fastest supercomputers.

Currently, the world's fastest supercomputer is with China and is known as Milky Way 2. It has a speed capacity of 33.86 quadrillion floating point operations (petaflops) per second. One of the main aims of program is to come up with a solution for the extremely expensive power and cooling problems that comes in superconducting computing.

Supercomputers consume around 10 megawatts to power 20 petaflops of computation. Another main aim of the program is manage building the most powerful supercomputer that will exceed China's Milky Way 2 speeds.

A series of supercomputers would be build under the program and they will be free from the metal oxide semiconductors that are currently used in this technology. In the program, cryogenic memory will be used that will allow increased capacity and speed for less space and less power consumed and also, overheating would no more be a problem.

Researchers involved in this project are also learning how to make use of Josephson Effect. In which electrical currents are created by cooling down copper wires to the absolute zero (-273 degrees Celsius). At that level, they become superconductive without any need of voltage.

The program has been divided into two phases. The first phase will run for three years in which technologies will be built needed to demonstrate a small superconducting demonstrator. In the second phase, which will be of two years, new technologies will be integrated into the working model of a superconducting computer.

