Rare stonefly species is threatened by shrinking glaciers and rising temperature

In 1963, a rare stonefly species was discovered along the mountain streams at Glacier National Park. Baumann & Gaufin named the species as the western glacier stonefly (Zapada glacier) in 1971. Now, there are just 25 known species of the rare western glacier stonefly around the world and experts believe that the continuous shrinking of glaciers and rising temperature is causing their extinction.

To document the changes in species distribution associated with glacial recession in the Rocky Mountains, researchers from the U.S. Geological Survey or USGS, Bucknell University and the University of Montana took stream samples in the park from 2011 to 2013. Based on their analysis, only one of the six streams they checked is inhabited by the insects.

Joe Giersch, a USGS entomologist said that their findings represent what could happen to other species in the area as global warming continues.

According to scientists, if the extreme global warming continues, it would melt the ice masses entirely by 2030.

For the rare stonefly to survive, they retreated upstream to search for cooler habitats away from the melting glaciers.

Gierch added that, “There are a handful of other coldwater dependent alpine aquatic species here in Glacier that are at risk of extinction due to the loss of permanent snow and ice. Under a warming climate, the biodiversity of unique aquatic alpine species – not just in Glacier, but worldwide – is threatened.”

To help save the rare stonefly species, the USGS ompleted a 90-day finding on a petition to list the western glacier stonefly under the Endangered Species Act (ESA).

According to ESA, “After evaluating all of the scientific information described or cited in the petition and information readily available in our files, we concluded that the petitioners provided substantial information indicating that protecting the species under the ESA may be warranted.  Therefore, we are initiating a full biological status review to determine if listing the species is warranted.”

