In Africa, Giraffes Suffer a Silent Extinction

According to a new research done by Julian Fennessy, from the namibian-based Giraffe Conservation research, giraffe populations in Africa have been declining due to poaching and habitat loss, and this “silent extinction” is going by unnoticed. Fennessy says that an assessment of the giraffe populations to be released in the next year shows that the population dropped 40% over the last 15 years. This decline in population was caused primarily by the land used by humans for agriculture where the giraffes are driven away from their natural habitat. Poaching and hunting of these animals have also increased in countries such as Tanzania, where they believe that eating a giraffe can cure AIDS. According to Zoe Muller, from the Rothschild Giraffe Project, their hides are also used as clothing, like hats and shoes.

 
Giraffes are indigenous to 21 countries in Africa, among national parks and communal and private lands and the findings of this new research show that the giraffe numbers went down from 140,000 to 80,000 in the last few years. because of this, two out of nine subspecies have been classified under the International Union for the Conservation of Nature’s Red List.

 

David O’Connor, a research coordinator from the San Diego Zoo’s Institute for Conservation research says that giraffes are easily visible in zoo collections and in books, so people don’t think that they need to worry about them going extinct. Also, conservationists point out that, compared to animals such as elephants and rhinos, giraffes are less likely to be worried about when it comes to extinction.

 

O’Connor says that learning more about the giraffe’s ecology can be helpful in conservation efforts, even though scientists have admitted to not giving much attention to the animal in the last five years or so, compared to other African animal species. However, even if giraffes have been somewhat neglected, there is still some good news, especially in Niger. There, the West African giraffe subspecies have rebounded from 50 in the 1990s, to 400 to date.

