Yosemite Area Audubon Society to Showcase Birds of Peru Presentation on December 11, 2014


The emerald-bellied puffleg (below) and the golden-bellied grosbeak will be featured in Matthew Matthiessen’s slide presentation on Peruvian birds at 7 p.m. December 11 at the Mariposa Methodist Church.  The public is welcome.  Photo credits: Matthew Matthiessen

Article contributed by Len McKenzie

The Yosemite Area Audubon Society invites foothill residents and visitors to enjoy an evening of fun, adventure and entertainment with Matthew Matthiessen, a captivating storyteller and world-class photographer, for a stunning slide presentation on the birds of Peru.  Matthiessen will show his program, a visual treat featuring many rare and colorful species, at 7:00 p.m. Thursday, December 11, 2014 at the Mariposa Methodist Church parish hall on 6th Street in downtown Mariposa.

Like other countries in South and Central America, Peru hosts an impressive diversity of fauna, including almost 1,900 species of birds, many of them endemic (found only there).  Matthiessen, the chief financial officer for the John C. Fremont Healthcare District and an extraordinary birder, visited northern Peru in October 2012 and birded from the Pacific coast to the high Andes, an area rich in endemics and site-specific birds such as the white-winged guan and gray-bellied comet.  This region is also home to some of the most spectacular birds in the world such as the Andean cock-of-the-rock and the marvelous spatuletail.
Emerald-Bellied-Puffleg
A University of Tennessee graduate, Matthiessen began birding while growing up in Thailand, developing a lifelong love for international birding.  He has since pursued his birding passion in many countries throughout the world and captured hundreds of images through his camera lens.

Matthew’s adventures have also produced some memorable, heart-pounding experiences.  He has lived through two bloody coups--one, in Thailand, successful and the other, in Zambia, not.  He has been charged by an elephant, stalked by a lion and threatened by a crocodile.  He has kissed a cobra, push-started a Jeep amidst a lion pride, had the spotlight die while next to a leopard, captured a 14-foot python and almost tripped over a sleeping silverback gorilla.  He will likely highlight some of those experiences in his presentation.

Like all YAAS programs, Matthiessen’s presentation is open and free to the public, although donations to defray program costs and to support Audubon’s local activities are welcome.