In Napa, a day for the birds – to be counted

Each year, thousands of volunteers hit fields and trails to help track the number and species of birds across North America. On Sunday, a Browns Valley nature preserve hosted the newest group of helpers in the effort – and one of the youngest.

Strolling Connolly Ranch with binoculars and field guides in hand were four boys and two girls, taking part in Napa’s inaugural Christmas Bird Count for Kids. Hiking through groves and over rain-slicked hills, they caught sight of acorn woodpeckers, ring-billed gulls and spotted towhees, with adult bird-watchers helping them record each species, more than two dozen in the course of their 90-minute tour.

The event offered the young hikers a taste of a 115-year-old tradition in citizen science – the Christmas Bird Count, an annual series of local expeditions sponsored by the National Audubon Society in which volunteers record the number of birds and bird species across North America. Participants add their results to an online database jointly kept by Audubon and Cornell University in Ithaca, New York.

“This is a kid-size event; it’s like the farm club for the main event,” said Tom Rusert, who with Darren Peterie was on hand to guide the half dozen junior bird-watchers.

Rusert and Peterie, members of the nonprofit Sonoma Birding, debuted the children’s event in 2007 in Sonoma County and have launched similar tours nationwide. Sonoma Birding, Connolly Ranch and the Napa-Solano Audubon Society joined forces to bring the children’s birding tour to Napa for the first time.

“I think it’s crucial to get kids out into nature,” Rusert said before Sunday’s tour. “These are our future leaders in the community, the ones who will vote on whether we have endangered species acts or set aside open lands. We’re using birds as a wedge to raise awareness of the natural world.”

After offering the junior volunteers a quick viewing tutorial with loaner binoculars, a team of guides split the children, ages 8 to 13, into two groups combing different sections of Connolly Ranch. Even amid patchy clouds and mud-caked hills, it did not take long for hikers to fill their log books with sightings – of a brace of golden crown sparrows yo-yo-ing up and down a tree’s canopy, or a sapsucker attracting attention with its birdsong piercing through the faint din from other birds.

Later, a sharper and louder call rang out, followed by another.

“There’s two of them,” said 8-year-old Miles Tenscher, putting down his clipboard of sightings and pointing toward the noise produced by red-shouldered hawks. “They’re setting up territory, maybe mating or pairing off,” Wendy Schackwitz, the Napa-Solano Audubon president, told Miles and two other children on the trail.

The calls turned louder, into cat-like snarling.

“Here’s another! That’s four!” said Miles’ brother, 11-year-old Seth Tenscher, as he glimpsed the other hawk pair — two males grabbing each other’s talons, descending from tree branches to the ground. “This is quite the jackpot,” he added with a smile before returning to the trail.

The siblings’ eyes and ears impressed their mentor for the day, even as she assured them that incomplete sightings, too, would be helpful.

“When you go out on a Christmas Bird Count, you don’t have to be an expert,” Schackwitz told her fellow hikers on their way back down the hill. “You just have to be a set of eyes to help the experts find the birds.”

At last the hikers returned from their journeys, and inside a barn they compared log sheets, tallying both the species they had seen and the total number of birds counted. Their haul totaled 28 bird species, 325 animals on the Connolly Ranch grounds — all the numbers to be sent to Cornell and added to eBird, the database jointly kept by the university and Audubon.

Afterward, the Tenscher brothers appeared strengthened in their enthusiasm.

“What was amazing was there’s so many of them — that you can just walk along and see thousands of birds,” said Miles, who had logged more than 120 of the winged creatures that morning.

“I’ll probably get an Audubon membership,” said Seth. “Or a new pair of binoculars.”