History Shows that Greenhouse Gases Will Affect The Future Climate of Africa

A new research suggests that the increased level of greenhouse concentrations thousands of years ago was a critical factor in huge amounts of precipitation in two key regions of Africa. The study, conducted by researchers at the National center for Atmospheric Research in Colo, was published in the Science journal.

 

Bette Otto-Bliesner, the lead author of the study and a NCAR climate scientist said: “The future impact of greenhouse gses on rainfall in Africa is a vital socio economic issue. Africa’s atmosphere seems bound to change, with broad ramifications for water resources and farming.”

 

Around 21000 years ago, the ice sheets that encased huge parts of North America and northern Europe withdrew from their top degree, and the atmosphere in Africa reacted in a way that left researchers scratching their heads. After a long dry amongst a glacial extreme, the precipitation level in Africa increased to a large degree, beginning about 14700 years ago, and continuing on until about 5000 years back.

 

In Africa, the level of precipitation was so high that the desert was changed over into savanna and meadow, a period which researchers later called the African Humid Period, or AHP. What they couldn’t figure out was why the same rainfall event happened in the meantime in two overall divided areas, one north of the equator and one to the south.

 

It was only recently that global warming was associated with the increase in the concentration of greenhouse gases. Anjuli Bamzai, the program chief in NSF’s Division of Atmospheric and Geospace Sciences and supporter of the study, says: “The study is a venture to settling the riddle of what activated sharp changes in precipitation over southeastern central and northern Africa amid right on time deglaciation. Through an investigation of intermediary records and atmosphere model imitations, the group exhibited that the recuperation of what’s known as the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation, or AMOC, assumed a part as a starting trigger to wetter conditions.”