Heat¡¯s defense continues to falter in loss to Grizzlies

The Heat held off Memphis for nearly the entire shot clock when Josh McRoberts smacked the ball out of Zach Randolph¡¯s hands and dove to seize a turnover midway through the third quarter. It bounced to Courtney Lee beyond the top of the key with one second left, and with McRoberts and Dwayne Wade leaping at him, he buried a deep 3 to beat the buzzer.

Most of Sunday¡¯s game felt like that for the Heat. Over-matched by Memphis, their grit was not enough to offset their disadvantages. The Grizzlies lit up Miami¡¯s defense, like everyone has lately, for a 103-87 win at FedExForum.

Heat¡¯s defense continues to falter in loss to Grizzlies photo
Nikki Boertman / The Commercial Appeal
Memphis' Tony Allen battles Miami's Dwyane Wade (left) and Mario Chalmers during Sunday's game. 
Reality is setting in for the Heat after four straight losses and an 0-2 start to this road trip. They are one of the worst defensive teams in the NBA and will not go anywhere unless they fix it.

¡°We¡¯ve had speeches, we¡¯ve had demonstrations, we¡¯ve had walk-throughs, we¡¯ve had practices, and still nothing happens,¡± Chris Bosh said. ¡°Hell, they shot 59 percent. We can¡¯t even get down to a flat 50. It¡¯s open season on us right now.¡±

Memphis, normally a 47 percent shooting team, ripped the Heat for 58.9 percent. Miami (9-11) has allowed at least 54 percent shooting from the field in six of its last nine games. It is allowing 48.1 percent overall this year, second-worst in the NBA.

Their defensive shortfalls rendered everything else irrelevant. Wade kept up his scoring roll with 25 points on 11-for-20 shooting and added six assists. McRoberts fought through an illness for his most complete game ? 14 points, five assists and five rebounds ? since joining the team. Miami hit 48.8 percent from the field and had 50 points in the paint against one of the league¡¯s top interior defenses.

All for nothing.

Bosh and McRoberts even did a reasonable job guarding Memphis big men Randolph and Marc Gasol, the main point of emphasis for Miami coming in, but the Grizzlies (16-4) hit 10 of 21 mid-range jumpers and 8 of 13 3-pointers.

¡°You come in with a game plan, and they beat you in other ways,¡± Wade said. ¡°The biggest thing we¡¯re looking for is, are guys doing the right thing, are we sticking to the game plan and are we making adjustments? I thought we did. They did a hell of a job making shots.¡±

Memphis¡¯ powerful post duo came in averaging 35.1 points and 19.4 rebounds per game. Randolph had 17 points and six rebounds, while Gasol scored two points on 1-for-6 shooting.

The Heat overcame their defensive lapses to make it a fight in the fourth quarter. They were down 13 after Lee¡¯s exasperating 3-pointer, but cut the gap to 82-75 by the end of the third and opened the fourth with two scores by Wade to pull within 82-79 with 10:30 remaining.

That was their last surge. Memphis went on an 8-0 run over the next two minutes and pushed its lead to 99-82 on Jon Leuer¡¯s dunk with 4:01 left. He came off the bench and dominated the Heat with 20 points and 12 rebounds in a mere 24 minutes.

¡°Those are the times you need to buckle down and not just get one stop,¡± coach Erik Spoelstra said of the missed opportunity to overtake the Grizzlies. ¡°Every time they needed a momentum-swinging shot, they got it.¡±

Mike Conley and Lee were problematic all night, combining to hit 5 of 5 3-pointers. Conley had 18 points on 8-for-8 shooting, and Lee scored 17.

Wade¡¯s 25 points topped a brief list of encouraging signs for Miami. Since returning from a strained hamstring that cost him seven games, he is averaging 25 points per game on 59.2 percent shooting.

Aside from that and McRoberts¡¯ breakthrough, there was little else.

Bosh put up 12 points, two rebounds and two assists.

Luol Deng scored 13 points and had five rebounds after missing the previous game with a bruised right hand that remains painful. Norris Cole came back from a two-game absence because of a cold and scored four points.

The Heat move on to Phoenix, where they will face a high-scoring Suns team Tuesday, then play at Denver on Wednesday. Both teams will test this leaking defense, and Miami must find answers immediately to bust out of its rut.

¡°Until we take more pride in that as a unit, it¡¯s just not gonna happen,¡± Bosh said. ¡°Everything else will follow.¡±

