Windsor: Playing Baylor could build MSU's credibility

Dropping in the polls never felt so good. One moment you're guessing Orange and the next you're rolling in Cotton.

Hey, Mark Dantonio will take it.

And like it.

Miami is nice and all, but Michigan State wanted ? and needed ? a game against the best opponent possible. The Orange Bowl ? and three-loss Georgia Tech ? wasn't going to be that opponent.

Baylor will be.


FREEP
Spartans will play on bigger stage in Cotton Bowl
Now the Spartans get one more chance to show they deserved all the playoff talk this year. Another shot to build on last year's Rose Bowl win, which, not coincidentally, Dantonio mentioned Sunday evening during a Cotton Bowl teleconference.

Are you surprised he did?

You shouldn't be.

He's not just a football coach. He's a salesman. He has to be.


Mark Dantonio talks about the Cotton Bowl berth against Baylor. Joe Rexrode, Detroit Free Press

Not just for potential recruits, but for the (changing) perception of his program, which is why when Mississippi State jumped Michigan State in the final rankings, it was a gift.

Baylor narrowly missed the College Football Playoff and, at No. 5, gives the Spartans its best shot at continued validation ... or credibility, as Dantonio called it.

Playing a top 10 team, he said, "will give us more (of it) as we move forward."

As long as his team wins the game.

This won't be easy. The Bears are an explosive squad that will test MSU's inconsistent secondary, just as Oregon and Ohio State did.


FREEP
Cotton Bowl coaches see parallels between Spartans, Bears
The Spartans needed a couple more plays in each of those games and couldn't make them. In essence, sliding to the Cotton Bowl and to Baylor gives MSU one more chance to make the plays it couldn't against the Ducks and the Buckeyes.

Do that, and Michigan State finishes the year in the top five ... for the second season in a row. Do that, and the credibility rises, giving Dantonio more authenticity as he molds the perception of his program.

Yeah, making the College Football Playoff was the goal, and it should be the goal. The Rose Bowl win showed us that. But even Alabama misses the title game some years.


FREEP
Drew Sharp: College Football Playoff crew takes big names over top teams
Those fans feel empty when that happens. Michigan State isn't close to that expectation, of course. Yet the losses to Oregon ? and especially to Ohio State ? gave the program and its followers a taste of that sort of defeat.

This was the first year since the BCS era began that the Spartans were part of the national conversation. It felt good, right?

The buildup to the game in Eugene, Ore., was new, and it was electric, a result of last year's Rose Bowl run and the ensuing attention. The Spartans were part of a similar buzz a month ago when the Buckeyes came to town.


FREEP
Our picks: Slight edge to Baylor over Michigan State in Cotton Bowl
Losing that night was painful for Dantonio, and he talked then about the cost of playing for higher stakes. Michigan State was sluggish the next week after the Ohio State loss but regained its footing to finish the season.

That effort, along with a little serendipity in the final poll, sets up the Spartans to take the national stage again.

"I'm not complaining because we are in the Cotton Bowl instead of the Orange Bowl, that's for sure," Dantonio said.

Why would he?


Tony Lippett talks about MSU going to the Cotton Bowl to face Baylor. Joe Rexrode, Detroit Free Press

His team may have gotten inexplicably jumped in the final playoff standings, but it couldn't have worked out sweeter for the Spartans. Remember, the Cotton Bowl will be played Jan. 1. Kickoff is scheduled for 12:30.

For a few hours anyway, the Spartans and the Bears will have college football's center stage. It may not be the Rose Bowl of a year ago. It certainly isn't the playoff.

It is far more than a chance for bragging rights, however. It is one more chance to make one more play.

And the sales pitch continues.

Contact Shawn Windsor: 313-222-6487 or swindsor@freepress.com. Follow him on Twitter @shawnwindsor.

