Perron leads Oilers over Sharks 2-1
EDMONTON, Alberta (AP) ? David Perron scored the game winner midway through the third period as the Edmonton Oilers beat the San Jose Sharks and snapped an 11-game losing streak on Sunday.

Nail Yakupov also scored for the Oilers (7-15-5), who won at home for the first time in nine games.

Edmonton got its first win against a Western Conference opponent? moving to 1-12-4 in the conference.

Tye McGinn scored the lone goal for the Sharks (14-11-4), who had a four-game winning streak halted.

There was no scoring in the first period, but Edmonton was the better team, putting 11 shots on Sharks goalie Alex Stalock, while San Jose only had two shots on Oilers starter Ben Scrivens.

The Oilers broke a tie eight minutes into the second period on a power-play goal. Sharks defender Justin Braun lost his footing and landed on Stalock's back as he was out of the crease trying to gather the puck. That allowed Jordan Eberle to send the puck in front to Yakupov, who scored just his fourth of the season on the wide-open net.


San Jose tied the game 1-1 two minutes later as Patrick Marleau out-hustled the Oilers' defense to negate an icing call before making a no-look backhand pass to McGinn, who beat Scrivens.

The Oilers caught a break just past the midway point of the third period to take a 2-1 lead. Perron's shot deflected off the leg of San Jose defender Brenden Dillon and got past Stalock. It was Perron's fourth goal of the season.

Scrivens had 20 saves on the night.

The Oilers and Sharks play a rematch in San Jose on Tuesday.

Notes: It was the first of five games this season between the Sharks and the Oilers, three of them are scheduled in December. The Sharks won four of five games against the Oilers last season recording 18 goals in those four victories. Edmonton's lone win came when goalie Ben Scrivens recorded a record 59 saves in a shutout win... San Jose forward Patrick Marleau had 26 points in his previous 22 meetings with the Oilers, scoring four goals and setting up two more against them last season... Stalock made his first start in the San Jose net since Nov. 8 because of a knee injury... Out with injuries for the Oilers were forwards Benoit Pouliot (foot) and Matt Hendricks (leg) and defenseman Nikita Nikitin (back) Out of the Sharks' lineup were Troy Grosenick (upper body), Raffi Torres (knee), Matt Nieto (lower body) and Tyler Kennedy (arm).


