BC is Bronx-bound

Boston College got the Christmas gift it had been wishing for since Labor Day.

The Atlantic Coast Conference yesterday placed the Eagles (7-5, 4-3) in the New Era Pinstripe Bowl at New York¡¯s Yankee Stadium on Saturday, Dec. 27 at 4:30 p.m.

¡°Where is there a better place to be on Christmas than in New York City,¡± BC coach Steve Addazio said yesterday after a team meeting.

¡°It¡¯s got it all for our alums and our fans to be there. I couldn¡¯t be more excited about this bowl game and we are honored .?.?. it means the world to our kids.¡±

BC, which has qualified for consecutive season postseason bowls under Addazio, will face Penn State of the Big Ten. Penn State has a 19-4 mark against BC, but the Eagles have won the last three encounters, including a home-and-home in 2003-04.

¡°There is a great old rivalry between Boston College and Penn State,¡± Addazio said. ¡°It¡¯s two old Northeast powers battling each other and when we announced it, the whole place went bananas.

¡°Obviously 90 percent of our team is New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania and Ohio so they get the whole BC vs. Penn State thing.¡±

Eagles wide receiver Josh Bordner was born and lived in College Park, Penn., before the family moved to Maryland. Bordner¡¯s father, Scott, is a lifelong Penn State fan, but that is about to change.

¡°I got a text from my father and he said ¡®This is the first time I¡¯ll be rooting against Penn State,¡¯?¡± Bordner said.

Addazio knows the Nittany Lions are equally excited and motivated to play BC but for different reasons. Penn State was slammed with a four-year bowl ban in July of 2012 in the wake of the Jerry Sandusky child sexual-abuse scandal. The NCAA lifted the ban Sept. 10 and Penn State made good on its opportunity by going 6-6.

¡°I know they are tough against the run and a real physical team and they haven¡¯t been to a bowl game in a while,¡± Addazio said. ¡°I know their fan base and players will be all excited.

¡°This will be two teams that are really anxious to play each other.¡±

BC athletic director Brad Bates had been lobbying the ACC selection committee for the Pinstripe Bowl after the Eagles secured their seventh win, against Syracuse, in the Nov. 29 season finale at Alumni Stadium.

¡°It was a very active week, there was a lot of activity after the (Syracuse) game,¡± Bates said. ¡°But at the end of the day, our players and our coaching staff deserve this and they are excited to play at this great location.¡±

