Jets lose Kane in game of inches against Ducks

Hockey certainly is a game of inches.

The Winnipeg Jets learned that lesson in its most literal sense Sunday, losing 4-3 to the Western Conference leading, Anaheim Ducks, 4-3, in overtime in front of a packed house at the MTS Centre.

Ducks forward Kyle Palmieri provided the final dagger, beating Jets goalie Ondrej Pavelec with a beautiful shot 53 seconds in to the extra period. At an almost impossible angle at the side of the net, Palmieri found the only light behind Pavelec, sniping a shot in the smallest of top corners to secure the extra point.

It was an impressive goal, and perhaps even a tad poetic, as it provided a stark contrast from what happened in the 60 minutes and change prior to the goal.

¡°It was just a great game ? lots of great chances, great pace,¡± said Jets coach Paul Maurice in his press conference after the game. ¡°Both teams competed on every puck. It was a disappointing result but a very well played game.¡±

He added, ¡°You don¡¯t walk away from that one worried about the what ifs.¡±

Maurice¡¯s upbeat take on the game was most likely the byproduct of the Jets earning points in six straight games, and have regained home ice advantage, something that¡¯d been lost over the last few seasons.

But it may be harder for Maurice to swallow tomorrow when he has time to go through the game tape, as the Jets missed a number of Grade A chances, alone and in close, that could have put the game away.

And Maurice won¡¯t have to wait long to find one. Not far in to the tape is Michael Frolik missing a glorious chance in front. With the puck on Frolik¡¯s stick and nothing but net in front of him, his shot grazed off the post, inches from going in, only to be cleared out by a Ducks defender.

Moments before, Perreault delivered a hard shot only to be stopped by the baby toe of Ducks¡¯ goalie Frederick Andersen.

Midway through the second period it was Adam Lowry. A broken play ended with the Jets rookie all alone in front but with two good whacks of the puck, he too was unable to make it count.

Dustin Byfuglien also had a breakaway in the third period, but missed.

¡°It¡¯s a good thing,¡± said Maurice, when asked about how much missed opportunities had a role in the game.

¡°I¡¯ll watch it tomorrow, and there will be a bunch of ones that you¡¯d like to see go for you because you know the end result but the things you try to do night after night were there. The effort was there. Our pace was good. We were aggressive in the offensive zone and created a lot off some turnovers down low. It was a good solid game. It was just a disappointing result.¡±

Jets captain Andrew Ladd, who scored his 10th goal of the season and also added an assist in the loss, echoed much of the same rhetoric after the game. The chances, Ladd said, are the result of the Jets doing a lot of great things.

¡°We¡¯ll stay upbeat in here,¡± said Ladd. ¡°We¡¯re happy with five out of six at home and we¡¯ll move on from here.¡±

The Jets are now 14-9-5 on the season, and remain in that eighth and final playoff spot in the West, one point up on the San Jose Sharks and four up on the Minnesota Wild, who has three games in hand.

The Jets hit the road for the next two games, beginning with the Dallas Stars Tuesday night, followed by the Colorado Avalanche Thursday, a team they just beat 6-2 on Friday.

Slap shots

Byfuglien extended his goal streak to four games, scoring a power play marker in the first period to open the scoring for the Jets. He led Jets in ice time for the second straight game, logging over 28 minutes in what was also his second game since his transition from forward to defence. 

¡°Honestly I haven¡¯t even looked at it,¡± admitted Byfuglien. ¡°It is nice to be back there and seeing the game from a different view now. I enjoy playing back there.¡±

The Jets scored two power play goals in a game for just the third time this season and are now 12-for-92 on the year.

Forward Evander Kane was given a five-minute penalty and a game misconduct for a hit from behind on Ducks¡¯ D-man Clayton Stoner. There¡¯s a good chance Kane will be receiving a call from the NHL¡¯s department of player safety for either an additional suspension or fine. 

