Nittany Lions earn trip to New York

UNIVERSITY PARK, Pa. -- Sunday night James Franklin took a quick break from in-home visits and recruiting trips and had a chance to settle into a Pittsburgh-area hotel and discuss Penn State's upcoming bowl game.

The Nittany Lions (6-6) are headed to New York to play Boston College (7-5) in the Pinstripe Bowl Dec. 27 at Yankee Stadium. The game, which kicks off at 4:30 p.m. and will air on ESPN, is Penn State's first postseason game since the 2012 TicketCity Bowl. Penn State's four-year bowl ban was part of NCAA sanctions stemming from the Jerry Sandusky child sexual abuse scandal, but the ban was lifted in September.

"It's excitement because I know how important these practices are on a lot of different levels," Franklin said via teleconference. He said he saw player reactions on Twitter but learned about the team's destination from athletic director Sandy Barbour. "The amount of work we're getting from the young guys already has been big. I just think from a program perspective it's invaluable."

The Nittany Lions are 19-4 against Boston College with the Eagles winning the previous three meetings, including a 21-7 victory in 2004. The Lions, who will appear in their 45th bowl game, hold a 2-1 edge in neutral-site games against Boston College.

Penn State's goal since learning it would be eligible for postseason play was to send this senior class, the one that stayed through unprecedented sanctions and bowl bans, out with a win. After a 4-0 start was followed by four consecutive losses, the Lions struggled in conference play and enter the bowl game with losses in two of their final three regular-season games.

Penn State practiced Saturday and Sunday and will practice on the weekends leading up to the game. Franklin said the team's week-day practices will include himself, offensive coordinator John Donovan, defensive coordinator Bob Shoop and special teams coordinator Charles Huff. The rest of the assistants will be on the road recruiting with the team's normal game preparations kicking in the closer it gets to the game.

He estimated 80 percent of the team's practices will take place at home before heading to New York.

"The first half of our bowl practices will be basically what we call program-development practices which will be like spring ball," Franklin said. "We want to use this time to develop the young guys, to sharpen up the old guys and continue to build the foundation."

In September, Boston College upset then-No. 9 Southern California, 37-31, and nearly beat undefeated Florida State in late November. Steve Addazio's Eagles lost two of their final three games, closing out with a win against Syracuse.

Boston College is powered by a run game that averages 251 yards and features dual-threat quarterback Tyler Murphy. The Eagles will face a Penn State run defense ranked No. 1 in Division I-A (84.8 yards).

