Willes: Catalyst for Canucks loss comes via the worst rule in pro sports

The stupidest rule in professional sports is the NHL¡¯s delay-of-game penalty when the puck is shot over the glass.

It¡¯s stupid on so many levels, in fact, it¡¯s impossible to know why it¡¯s still in the rule book. It equates shooting the puck out of play with a penalty that takes away a scoring chance. It puts this innocuous act on the same level as an elbow or high stick to the head. It has no relevance to the game yet it¡¯s penalized as if it¡¯s a significant foul.

On Sunday, it also changed the entire complexion of the Canucks game in Ottawa. Midway through the second period, with the Canucks leading 3-0 and killing a penalty, Chris Tanev attempted to clear the puck from the front of his net. It might have gone off the stick of an Ottawa player. It might not have. But after huddling, the officials deemed Tanev had contravened the rule, then the Sens¡¯ David Legwand scored on the subsequent five-on-three and, just like that, the game changed.

The Canucks would hang on to earn a loser point in the 4-3 Sens¡¯ win, largely because Eddie Lack stopped 41 of 44 shots in regulation time before the irrepressible Erik Karlsson scored the overtime winner. But the inescapable fact is the Canucks had complete control of this one until the penalty on Tanev ? and that call shouldn¡¯t be the talking point of the game.

OK, we¡¯ll give you the Canucks could have responded better to their misfortune. We¡¯ll also give the Senators were clearly the better team on the ice, over the final 30 minutes anyway. But the Canucks also deserved a chance to play this one out, to see if they could control the second half of the game the way they controlled the first half and it was denied them by the stupid rule.

While we¡¯re on the subject, let¡¯s ask if the refs would have looked that closely at Tanev¡¯s play if the Sens would have been up 3-0.

The point did guarantee a .500 record for the Canucks on their seven-game road trip. They wind things down in Montreal on Tuesday night and a win there gives them a 4-2-1 mark which would qualify as a success. It would also ease the sting of this one.
