Defense at its best (again) as Cats devour Colonels


Jeff Neubauer was looking for something ? anything ? to make his team feel better. His Eastern Kentucky Colonels, after all, had just taken a 82-49 thrashing from the nation¡¯s top-ranked team in Rupp Arena.

EKU¡¯s coach wanted some sort of tangible statistic that verified what he had seen for 40 minutes, which was effort and hard work from his players. And he found it ? in the rebounds column. The Colonels, he pointed out, had held Kentucky to just 10 offensive rebounds. Of the 29 shots the Wildcats missed, they had managed to snatch only a third of them off the rim.

Small victories.

It¡¯s what nine teams have looked for this season after tangling with the Wildcats.

¡°Our team, I told them they were just guarded by the best defensive team in the modern era of college basketball,¡± Neubauer said, ¡°and I¡¯m not exaggerating a little bit when I say that.¡±

Exaggerating? Who knows. It¡¯s too soon to tell. But that doesn¡¯t mean he¡¯s wrong.

The Wildcats held the visitors to six-of-35 shooting (17.1 percent) in the first half, which is when the game was decided. In fact, the only drama that played out before 23,268 fans was Kentucky¡¯s quest to keep The Streak alive.

Coming into Sunday night¡¯s game, the Wildcats had nailed a three-pointer through 908 consecutive games, the second-longest streak of its kind in NCAA basketball. Late in the game, EKU extended its defense well beyond the arc, content in surrendering layups and dunks in exchange for, perhaps, ruining the UK run of triples.

Small victories.

But (and stop me if you¡¯ve heard this one) Aaron Harrison came through with a big trey to the left side of the key, well beyond the stripe. He buried a bomb with 2:57 left to the delight of whatever fans had stuck around. And then, just for good measure, Karl-Anthony Towns dropped one in as well. So did Derek Willis.

Freshman guard Devin Booker was slowed by a slight knee injury, noticeably hobbling around the Wildcat huddle late in the game, a brace on his right leg. Booker finished 0-for-6 from downtown, including a couple of misses late, when the Cats obviously were shooting to protect the streak.

It¡¯s been in jeopardy a couple of times (including the Texas game on Friday) but the outcome with Eastern was never in doubt. EKU¡¯s only hope was to come out firing from long-range, as the Colonels are known to do, bury enough threes to at least put pressure on the Wildcats and then settle back into a pesky 1-3-1 zone.

Missing 15 of their 17 three-point attempts in the first half put an end to that strategy and the game devolved into an array of Kentucky blocked shots (11), steals (six) and alley-oops (about a zillion).

The streak most pleasing to the UK coaches didn¡¯t involve the triple the Wildcats finally scored. They liked the defense. Kentucky has held an opponent to 55 points or fewer in each of the last five games and eight of nine this season. That¡¯s a magic number, 55. Kentucky is now 46-0 under John Calipari when holding its opponent to that total or fewer.

¡°We have defended well all year long and we expect that,¡± said assistant coach John Robic, subbing for Calipari, who apparently had a sore throat and not much voice left. ¡±Some of the numbers that we're producing right now are kind of silly. Our guys are taking pride in defense right now and really buying into it.¡±

They¡¯re buying into each other as well. The Cats had 21 assists on 33 made field goals. When it came time for a shift change in the second half, Willie Cauley-Stein asked Calipari to give his minutes to Marcus Lee.

¡°It kind of shows how much we care about each other and we are just not there for ourselves,¡± Lee said. Lee finished with 10 points, three rebounds and a blocked shot in 13 minutes.

¡°As a group we really grinded on our game,¡± he said. ¡°As you guys can see, we are not trying to work on the fly, we just try to learn differently and that¡¯s what we do really well. You see that we are playing really well together.¡±

Jeff Neubauer saw it, from the ugly side of the scoreboard.

¡°The feeling that our guys have in the locker room right now after shooting 26 percent, being held to 49 points is a feeling that¡¯s not good,¡± he said. ¡°That¡¯s not something that we¡¯re accustomed to, or ranked teams in the country are accustomed to. However, that is what Kentucky has done to every opponent that they have played so far.¡±

They knew that coming in, did the Colonels, that the Wildcats had been holding their opponents to 28 percent shooting from the field.

¡°That¡¯s absolutely amazing,¡± Neubauer said.

It is ? even from what might be the best defensive team in the modern era of college basketball.

(Dick Gabriel is in his 25th year with the UK TV/Radio network. He can be heard Mon.-Fri. at 6 p.m. hosting the Big Blue Insider on 630 WLAP-AM)

