Knicks drop eighth in row in 103-99 loss to Blazers

NEW YORK ? Once the Knicks imagined LeBron James in blue and orange, guiding the franchise back to glory. Instead of joining them, he was courtside Sunday night munching popcorn and watching with morbid curiosity as the team dropped its eighth straight game.

While James could have opted for a play, a movie or a nice dinner, he instead got drama, comedy and heartbreak at the expense of the Knicks, who saw another last minute chance slip away in a 103-99 loss to Portland at the Garden.

James is in town for a game in Brooklyn tonight, an appearance in which he won¡¯t be the biggest worldwide celebrity with Prince William and Kate Middleton planning to take in the game. What he saw was the Knicks bungle away another chance while falling to 4-18 on the season.

¡°I knew he was in town,¡± Carmelo Anthony said. ¡°I didn¡¯t believe he would come, but that just goes to show you what type of guy he is.¡±

James¡¯ decision-making could be questioned, but he was there until getting up and exiting with 1.7 seconds left and the Blazers sinking the free throw to put it out of reach. Just as they have in recent games, the Knicks did enough to convince themselves that they were right there ? and also did just enough to ensure another loss.

¡°I think there¡¯s a level of attention to detail that we¡¯re still below in order to win these games,¡± coach Derek Fisher said. ¡°I think we¡¯re obviously doing enough to be in the game and have a chance to win.¡±

A back-and-forth game threatened to get away in the fourth quarter as the Blazers opened up a 92-81 lead with nine straight points from Wes Matthews. But J.R. Smith, who had 20 points off the bench, scored five straight and then Anthony responded by hitting a three-pointer with 5:54 left and then a midrange jumper to close the gap to 95-93.

Amar¡¯e Stoudemire tied the score with 4:29 remaining with a 16-foot jumper over Robin Lopez. The Knicks then moved in front when Jason Smith fed a cutting Anthony for a layup and a 97-95 lead with 3:33 to play.

But they could not hang on. A Damian Lillard free throw cut it to one, and after a Knicks timeout J.R. Smith turned the ball over and LaMarcus Aldridge then hit two free throws to nudge the Blazers back in front with 2:46 to play. Anthony misfired on a jumper, and an Aldridge layup pushed the lead to 100-97.

Pablo Prigioni penetrated and found Stoudemire for a dunk with 1:45 left, but Aldridge answered again, quieting the crowd with 1:18 left. Anthony misfired on a jumper, and the next time down Prigioni missed a three with 28.9 seconds left. Aldridge missed a jumper, but Lopez grabbed the rebound and the Blazers played keep away until just 1.7 seconds remained. The Knicks then fouled Matthews, who clinched it at the line.

¡°I think when it¡¯s knuckle-up time, we have to execute better and just keep getting stops,¡± J.R. Smith said. ¡°We played well in the fourth quarter. The last minute they just played better than us and they won.¡±

The Blazers came into the game winners of 12 of their last 13, signaling the beginning of a brutal stretch for New York. The Knicks, who have the worst road record in the NBA at 1-9, embark on a three-game trip starting Tuesday in New Orleans. When they return home, they don¡¯t face a team with a losing record the rest of the month. The prospect makes the games that the Knicks have been in and seen slip away all the more painful. The Knicks trailed by at least 16 points in four of the five games before Sunday, but managed to battle back in nearly every one but Oklahoma City ? but could not execute in the clutch to make it happen.

 