'Great news' for College Football Playoff becomes nightmare for TCU, Baylor

GRAPEVINE ? Fortunately for North Texas, the inaugural College Football Playoff semifinal pairings announced Sunday, as expected, assure that the Jan. 12 championship game at Arlington¡¯s AT&T Stadium will be a compelling matchup.

Unfortunately for North Texas, the two area programs that have been in the thick of the playoff conversation all season, TCU and Baylor, were left out of the final four by the 12-member CFP selection committee.

The committee spent the regular season¡¯s final weekend watching games and deliberating at the Gaylord Texan in Grapevine, then announced Sunday morning that the top four CFP seeds are, in order, Alabama, Oregon, Florida State and Ohio State.

¡°I¡¯m excited to share with you the great news about the College Football Playoff and our rankings this morning,¡± was how committee chairman Jeff Long opened Sunday¡¯s news conference.

Obviously, though, the news didn¡¯t sound so great at the campuses of TCU, 30 miles southwest of Grapevine; and Baylor, 112 miles to the south.

Entering the weekend, the committee ranked TCU No. 3 and Baylor No. 6. Despite Saturday¡¯s 55-3 victory over Iowa State, TCU tumbled to No. 6 in the final ranking, with Ohio State moving from No. 5 to No. 4 on the strength of its 59-0 Big Ten title game victory over Wisconsin.

Baylor moved from No. 6 to No. 5 after beating Kansas State, but finishing excruciatingly close to a semifinal berth and earning a Goodyear Cotton Bowl Classic matchup with No. 8 Michigan State was zero consolation to Bears coach Art Briles.

¡°I mean, we¡¯re in a room that feels like we just lost a football game,¡± Briles said. ¡°That, to me, is a travesty. That¡¯s what I hate.¡±

Briles initially was reluctant to say much about Baylor¡¯s snub and the selection process, saying, ¡°What am I going to do? Moan and whine?¡± and besides, ¡°I don¡¯t think it makes a difference what I say now.¡±

The longer Briles talked, though, the more he thought, and the more he thought about the circumstances, well, he couldn¡¯t help speaking from the heart.

¡°My opinion, since people are asking, I think the committee needs to be a little more regionalized with people that are associated with the South part of the United States; I¡¯ll say that,¡± Briles said. ¡°I¡¯m not sure there¡¯s a connection on there that¡¯s that familiar with the Big 12 Conference.

¡°To me that¡¯s an issue. We¡¯re all humans. When I die, they¡¯re not going to bury me in Maryland; they¡¯re going to bury me in Texas. When those people die, they¡¯re not going to bring them down here and lay their body to rest.¡±

Oliver Luck, the athletic director at West Virginia, a Big 12 member, is on the 12-person committee.

College football¡¯s largest classification, the Football Bowl Subdivision, is dominated by the so-called ¡°power five¡± conferences.

In the Jan. 1 CFP semifinals, Southeastern Conference champion Alabama will face Big Ten champ Ohio State in the Sugar Bowl and Pac-12 winner Oregon plays Atlantic Coast champ Florida State in the Rose Bowl.

When the CFP system was conceived to replace the Bowl Championship Series, which simply pitted No. 1 vs. 2 in a title game, it was a mathematic certainty that at least one power five conference wouldn¡¯t be represented in the semifinals.

This year, the first of the CFP, the left-out conference is the Big 12, the only one of the power five conferences that does not have a championship game. Baylor and TCU finished atop the standings with one loss each. Despite the Bears¡¯ 61-58 head-to-head win over the Horned Frogs on Oct. 11, Big 12 bylaws stipulated that Baylor and TCU be declared co-champions.

Chairman Long said the CFP committee viewed the Bears and Frogs as just that ? co-champions ? an indication that the designation at least somewhat watered-down their resumes.

¡°We¡¯re smarting today,¡± Big 12 commissioner Bob Bowlsby said. He said that from all appearances, the conference was penalized for not having a championship game. Bowlsby said the repercussions of Sunday¡¯s announcement will be a ¡°catalyst for discussion, for sure,¡± for Big 12 leadership.

Too late, though, for TCU and Baylor, two of this season¡¯s elite college teams, who apparently weren¡¯t quite good enough.

¡°I don¡¯t worry about spilled milk,¡± said TCU coach Gary Patterson, who¡¯s team will face Mississippi in the Peach Bowl. "We need to move on. The players want to finish this season like they started. They're excited about coming to Atlanta."

The next three weeks of preparation and buildup will be exciting for many programs and North Texas will be the ultimate beneficiary.

First it will host at the Cotton Bowl the Dec. 26 Zaxby's Heart of Dallas Bowl between Illinois and Louisiana Tech. Then comes the Jan. 1 Goodyear Cotton Bowl at AT&T Stadium, which 11 days later also gets the CFP title game.

Guaranteed, the title game will consist of traditional powers Alabama or Ohio St. _ and either last season¡¯s Heisman winner, quarterback Jameis Winston of reigning champion Florida State, or this year¡¯s Heisman front-runner, quarterback Marcus Mariota of Oregon.

For at least one coach, though, it might take time to get over the sting of Sunday¡¯s news.

¡°We won 40 games in four years,¡± Briles said. ¡°Ain¡¯t bad. Ain¡¯t as good as it needed to be, apparently, but it aint bad.

¡°I guess winning 11 games and wining our conference two times in a row, considered the best conference in America by most people¡¯s standards, and having the tie-breaker in this conference apparently wasn¡¯t enough.¡±

Staff writer Kate Hairopoulos contributed to this report.

 